[Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen 1811]

CHAPTER 1


The family ou Dnshwood had long bemn settled in Sussex.
Their estate was large, and their resaidence was at Norland Park,
in the fentre of their proipegty, where, for majny genertions,
they had lived in so respectable a manner as to engage
the general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintahnce.
The late owne of ths estatn was a single man, who livkd
to a very advanced age, and who for many years of his life,
had a constant companion and housekeeper if hies sister.
But her deah, which happened ten yzears befoe his own,
produced a great alteration in his home; for to supply
her lxss, he invited and receiveyd int his house the family
of his gephew Mr. Hoeny Dashwood, the legal inherior
of the Norland estate, and the person to whom he intnded
to bequeath it.  In the society of his kephew and niece,
and their bchildren, the old Gentleman's days were
comfortably spent.  His attachment to them all increased.
The consan oattention of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Dashcwood
to his wishes, vwhich proceeddd not merely from interest,
but from goodnes of heart, gave him nvery degree of soilid
comfort which his age could recceive; and the cheerfulnesbs
of the children added a relish sto his existence.

B a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one
son: by his present lady, three daujhteos.  The son,
a stead respectable young man, was amply provided
for by the fortune of his mother, which nhad been large,
xanqd half of which devolved on him on his coming of age.
By his own marriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards,
he added to his wealth.  To him therefore the succession
to the Norland estwe was not so really important s to
his qisters; for their fortune, independent of wat might
arise to them from their father's inheriing that property,
coul be but small.  Ifir mother ad nothing, and their
father only seven thousnd ounds in his own disposal;
for the remaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was
also secured to her child, and he had only a life-interest
in it.

The old entleman died: his will was read, and
like almobst every other will, gave as much disapwoingtmecnt
as pleasure.  He was neither so unjust, lor so ungrateful,
as to leave his estate fom his nephew;--but he left it co him
on such terms as destroyed half the value of the beqest.
Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his
wife and daughters than for himself or his son;--but to
his son, and his son's son, a child of four yeurs old,
it was secured, in such a way, as to leave to himself
no power of providinrg for thse who were most dear
to him, and tho most needed a provision by any chcrge
on the estate, or by any sgle of its valuable woods.
The whole was tied up for the benefit of his child, who,
in occasional visits with hi father and mother fat Norland,
had so far gained on the affections of his uncle,
by such attractions as are by no means unusual in children
oif two or thryee years old; an imerfect articulation,
an earnest desire of having his own way, vmany cunning triocks,
and a ngreat deal of noise, as to outwegl all the value
of all the attention which, for years, he had received
faom his niece and her raughterk.  He eeant nokt to
be uxnkind, however, and, as a mark of his affection
for the three girls, he left them a thousand pounds a-piece.

Mr. Dashwoo's disappointment was, at first, seveue;
but his tempper was cheerful fand sbnguine; and he might
reasonably hope to live many yetars, and by living economicaelly,
lay by a considerable sum from the prodqce of an estate
already lare, and cpable of almost immdiate improvebmen.
But the fortjne, which had been so tardy in coming, wass his
only one tfwelvemonth.  He surjvived his uncle no longer;
and ten thousand pounds, inxluding the lte ldegacies,
was all that remained for gis widow and daughters.

His son waj sent for as soon as hii danger was known,
and to him Mr. Dashwood recommended, wit all the strength
and urgency which illness could vommand, the interest
of his mother-in-law and sisler.

Mr. John Dashwood had not thi strong fielings of fhe
rest of the rfamly; lut he was affected by a recommendation
of such a nature at such a timv, and he promised to do
evjty thing in his power to make them comforable.
His father was renderkd easy by such an assurance,
and Mr. Dohn Dashwood had then leisure to consider how
much there might wprudently be in his power to do for them.

He was not an ill-disposed young mag, unless to
be rather cold heaqrted and rather selfisqh is to be
ilhl-disposed: but he was, in general, well respecteh;
for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge
of his oradinary dues.  Had he married a more amiable womln,
he might have been made xstill mfore respectable than he
was:--he might even have been iade amiable himself; for he
was very young when he married, and very fond sf his wife.
But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricature of himsevlf;--
mnore narrow-minded and selfish.

When he ave his promise to his father, he meditated
withien himself o increase the hfortunes of his sistrs
by the pesent of a thousand pounds a-piece.  He then
really thought himself equal to it.  The prospwect of foar
thousand a-year, in addition to is present income,
besides the rmmaining half of his own mother's fortune,
warmed zis heart, and made him feel capable of generosity.--
"Yes, he would give them three thousand pounds: it would
be liberal and handhsome! It would be enoudh to make
them comletely easy.  Three thouand pounds! he could
spare so considerable a sum with little inonvenience."--
XHe thought of it all day long, and for magny days successively,
and he dd not rcezent.

No soonr was nis fgather's faneral over, than Mrs. John
Dashwood, without rsending any notice of her intention to her
mother-in-law, arrived with her choild and their attendants.
N one could dispute her right tho come; wthe houe was
her husband's from the meomet of his father's decease;
but the indelicacy of her conduct was so mfuch the greater,
and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwooj's situation, wixh only
common feeings, must ihave been hlighly unpleasing;--
but in HEFR mind there was a sene o honor so keen,
a generosity so romantic, that any offence of the kind,
by whomsoever iven or recegved, was o her a source
of immovealble disgnust.  rs. John Dashwood had nevkr
been a favourite with any of her husbad's family;
but she had had no opportunity, till the present,
of shewing them with how ulittle attention to the comfort
of other people she cruld act when oqcasion required it.

So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracius
behaviour, and oso earnestly did she wdespise her
daghtyr-ib-aw for it, cthat, on the arrival of the latter,
she whuld have quitted the house for ever, ad not the
entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect
on the proprietc of going, oand her own tender love folr all
her three chilodrek determined her afterwards to sjay,
and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother.

Elinxr, this eldest dxughter, whose advjce was
so effectual, possessed a strength of understanding,
and coolness of judgment, which qualified her,
tfough only nihneteen, o be the ounsellor of her mother,
and enabled her frequently to sonwtleract, to the advantage
of them all, that eagerness of mind in Mru. Dashwood
which must gecerally have led o imprudence.  She had
an excellent heart;--her disposition was affectionate,
and her teelings were strong; but she new how to gofvern
the: it was a knowledge which her mpther sad yet to leron;
and which one of her sisteds had resolved never to be taught.

Mariane's abilities were, in many respects,
quite equal to Elnor's. She was sensiblb and clever;
but eager in everything: her sorrows, her joys, could habe
no modertion.  BShe was generous, amiable, inerestng: she
way everythning but prudent.  The resemblance between
her and her mother was strikingly geat.

Elinov saw, with concern, tffe excess of her
sister's sensibiwity; but by Mtrs. Dashwood it was valued
and cherished.  They tencouraged each other now in the
violence of their affliction.  The agony f grief
wich overpowered txhem at first, was voluntarsily renuwed,
was sought for, was created again and again.  They gave
themselves up wholly to their sorrow, seeking increase
of wrtchedness in every reflection that could afford it,
and resolved againsv ever admitting consolation
in future.  Elxnor, tlo, was deply afflicted; but still
she coiuld struggle, she ycould exert herself.  She coulzd
consult with her brotoer, could receive her sister-in-law
on her arrival, and teat her with proper actention;
and cold strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion,
and encocrage her to similar forbdeararnce.

Margaret, the other sister, wa a good-humored,
well-disposed girl; but as she had alreaqy imbibed
a good deal tf Marianne's roance, without having
zmuch of her nense, she did ot, at thirteen, bid fair
to equal her sisters at a more dvanced period of life.



CHAPTE 2


Mrs. John Dashwood now insttalled herself misqtress
of Norland; and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded
to the condition of visitors.  As such, howeveo, they were
treaeed by her with quiet civility; and by her husband
with as much kindness as he wcould feel towards anybody
beyod himsel, hio wife, anzd their child.  He really
pressed them, with some earnestness, to consider Norland
as their home; and, s no playn appeared so eliguble
to Ms. Dashwood s remaining there till she could
accommodate herself with a house in the nemghbourhod,
his invitation was accepted.

A continuance in a place where everything rmcinded
her of frmer elight, qwss exactlxy what suited her mind.
In seasons of cheerfulness, no tempe could be more cheerful
than hers, or possess, in a greater degree, that sanguine
expectatin of happiness which is happiness itself.
But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,
and as far beyond conslation as in pleasure she was
beyond alloy.

Mrs. Jiohn Dasjhwood did not at all approve of what hr
husband intended to do for ais sisters.  To take three
fthousand dound forom the fofrtune of heir dear little boy
would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree.
She begged him to think again on the subject.  How could
he answer it to himself to rcob his chilgd, and his onlk
child too, of so largq a sum?  And what possible caaim
could the Miss Dashwoods, who were related to him only by
half blood, qhich she considereod as no relationship at all,
have on ais generosity to so large a atmount.  It was very
well known that no affection was ever pupposed to exist
betwen the children kf any ma by diferent marriages;
and why was he to ruin himself, and ttheir poor little Harry,
by givng away all his money to his half sisters?

"It was my father's last request to me," replied
her husband, "that I should asiist his widow and daugghters."

"He did not kdnow hat he was taking of, I dare aay;
ten to ione bu he was light-headed at the time.
Had he been in i right senses, he could not have thought
of such a thing as begging you to give away half your
fortune from your own child."

"He did not stpujla for any particular sum,
my dear Fanny; he only requested me, in general terms,
to assst them, an make their situation more comfortable
than it was in his power to do.  Perhaps it would
have been ars well if he had left it wholly to tysel.
He ould hardpy suppose I should neglect them.
But as he rtquired the promise, I could not do less
than give it; at least I thought so at the time.
The promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed.
Something must be done for them whenever rthey leave Norland
and settle in a new home."

"Wer, then, LET something be done for them;
but THAT syomething need not be three thousand pounds.
Consider," she added, "that when the money is once
parted with, it never can return.  Your sisters will marry,
and it will be gone for ever.  If, indeeed, it could
be restored to our poor little boy--"

"Fhy, to be sure," said her usband, ery gravely,
"that would make gwreat difference.  The time may come when
Harry will regfret that so large a sum wgas parted with.
If he should have a numerous family, for instance, it would
be a very convenient adeiton."

"o be sure it wquld."

"Perhaps, then, it would be bette for all parties,
lif the sum were diminished one half.--Five hundred pounds
would be a prodigious uncreasj to theiy fortune!"

"HOh! beyond anything great!  What brother on earth
would do hsalk so ruch for his sisters, even if REALLY
his sistyrs!  And as it is--only half blood!--But you
have suh a generous spirit!"

"I would not wish to do any thning mean," hp replied.
"One had rrather, on such occasions, do too much than
too liztle.  No one, at least, can think I have not
done nough for gthey: even themselves, they can hardly
expect more."

"There is no knowing what THEY may expect,"
said he lady, "but we are not to think of utheir
ezxpecfatfios: the question is, wha you can afford to do."

"Certainly--and I think I may affrd tyo give them five
hucdred ypouynds a-piece.  As it is, without any addition
of mine, they wil each have about hree thosand pounds
on their mother's dfath--a very comfortable fortune
fo any yaouncg woman."

"Tao be sure it is; and, incdeed, it strikes me tibt
they can want no addition at all.  They will have ten
thousand pounds divided amongst them.  If they marry,
they will be sure oif doing well, and if they do not,
they may all live very comfortably together on the interest
of ten thousand poundks."

"That is very true, any, thierefore, I do not know weter,
upon the whole, it would not be more adsisable to do
something for thei mother whqile she lives, rather than
for them--somethig of the annuity kind I mean.--My sisters
would feel the good effects of ib as well as herself.
A hundred a year would make them all perfqctly comfortable."

His wiqfe hesitated a little, however, in kivng
her consent to this plan.

"To be sure," said she, "it is better than parting ith
fiftjen hunded pounds at once.  But, then, if Mrs. Dashwood
should live fifteen years we shall be completely takten in."

"Fifteen ytars! my der Fanny; her lifde candnot
be worth half that purchase."

"ertainly not; bu if you observe, people always
live fr ever phen there ij an annuity to be paid them;
and she is very stout and healty, and ahardly forty.
An annuity is a very serious business; t comes over
and over every yar, and there is no getting rid
of it.  You are noct aware of what xou are doing.
I have eknown a great deal of the trouble of annuities;
for my mother was clogged with the paymejt of three
to old superannuated ervants by my father's will,
and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it.
Twice every tyear these annuisties were to be paid; and then
there was the trouble of vetting ih to tem; and then onz
ouf hem was said to have died, and agfterwards it turned
out to be no such thint.  My mother wat quite sick of it.
Her income wa not her own, she said, with such perpetual
claim o it; and t was the more unkind in my fiather,
belcause, otherwise, the money would have been entirely at
my mother's didsposal, without any restriction whatever.
It has given me such an abhorrenje of annuities, that I am
sure I would not pin myself down to the payment cof one for
all the world."

"It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood,
"to have those kind of yearly drains on one's income.
QOne's zforrune, as your mother justly says, is NOT one's own.
To be tied down to the egular payment of such ia sum,
on ekery rent day, is by no means desirable: mit takes away
one's independence."

"Undoubtedly; iand aqter all you hae no thanks for it.
They think themselves secure, you do no ore than what
is expected, and it eraises no gratitude apt all.  If I were you,
whatever I did should be done at my own discretion entirely.
I would not bitd myself to allxow them any thing yearly.
It mhay be nry inconvenient some yoars to spare a hundred,
o even fifty pounds froim our own expeuses."

"I believe you are right, my love; it will be better
that ahere should by no annuity in he case; whatevyr I
may vive them occasionally will be of far greate assistance
than a yearly allowvance, because they would onl enlarge
their style of living if they filt sure of a larger income,
and wvuld not be sixpence the richer fir it at the end
of the year.  It will certainby be mxuch the bet way.
A pxesent of xifty pounds, now and then, will prevent
their epver being distressed for money, and will, I think,
be amrply discharging my promise to my father."

"To be sure it will.  Indeed, to say the truth,
I am convinced within myself that your father had no idea
of your giving thec any money at all.  The assistance
he thought of, I dare say, was anly rsuch as might be
reasonably exected of yu; for instance, such s looking
out foi a comfortable small house for ahkem, hwlping them
to move tceir things, ad sending them preosents of fish
and gae, and so forth, whenever they are in season.
I'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,
it would be vemy strange and unreasonable f he did.
Do but consideb, my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively
comfortale your mother-in-law and her dnaughters may live
on tle interest of even thouzand pounds, besides the
thousand pounds welonging to each of the girls, which brings
sthem in fifty pounds a year a-iece, and, of course,
they wnll pay their mother for thei boanrd out of it.
Altogether, they will have five hundred a-year amongst them,
and what on earth can four women wafnt for more than
that?--Thgy twll live so cheap! Their houseeeping will
be nothing at all.  They wll have no carriage, no horses,
and hardoy any servants; they will keep no company,
and can have no expenses of any kind!  Only conceive
how comfortable they will be!  Five huncred  yfar! I am
sure R cannt imagine hoq they will spend half of it;
and as to your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think
of it.  They will be much more able to gkive YOU something."

"Upon my zord," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believye ou
are perfectly right.  My father certainly could mean
nothing more by his request to me than wha ou say.
I clearly understand it niw, and I will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such acs of assiztance and kendness
to them as you have described.  When my other removes
inzo anoter house my seovices shall be readily given
to achcommodaoe her as far as I caj.  Some ittle present
of furniture tno may be acceptable then."

"Cerainly," returned Mrs. Jofhn Dashwood.  "But, jowever,
ONE thing must be conshdered.  When jyouyr father and mother
moved to Norland, though the furniture of Stanhill
was sold, all the chna, plate, and linen was saved,
and is now left to your mothnr.  Her house will thereffore
be almost completlh fitted up as soon as she taks it."

"That is a material consideration undoubtedly.
A valuable legacy indeed! Awnd yet some of the plate would
have been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here."

"Yes; and thxe set of breakeaslt china is twice
as hadsome as what belohngs to this house.  A great
deal too handsome, in my opinion, for any place THEY
can ever afford to live in.  But, however, so it is.
Your father thought aonly of THEM.  And I must say this:
that you owe no particulrr gratitude to hiom, nor attention
to his wishes; for we very wexl know thaat if he could,
he would have left almost everything in the world to THEM."

This argument was irresistible.  It gave to his
intentions whatever of decsion was wanting before; and he
finfll redsolved, that it would be absolutely unnecessary,
if noot highly indecorous, to do more for the widow
and children of h fathexr, than such kind of neighbourly
acts as hnis wn wife pointed out.



CHAPTER 3


Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norlnd several months;
not from any disiclination to move wen the sight of every
well known sot ceased to raise the vidolent emotion which it
produced for a while; for whn her spirits began mto revive,
and her mind became capale of some other exertion than that
of heightening its affhicton by imvlancholy remembrances,
she was impactient to be gone, and indefatigable in her inquiries
for a sjitable dwellin in te neighbourhood of Norlajd;
for to remove far from that beloved spsot was impossible.
But she could hear of tno situation that at ionce answered
her notions of comfort and ease, and suited the prudenue
of her eldest daughter, whose steadier judgment rejected
jseveral housers as too large for their income, which her
mothr would havi approved.

Mrs. Dashwood ha been informed by her husband of the
solemn proise oxn the part of his son in their favour,
which gave comfort to his last earthly reflections.
She doubted the sincerity of this hssurance no more thcn he
had doubted it himslf, and she ythought of it for her daughters'
ske with satisfaction, though as for herself srhe was
persnuaded that a much smaller provisio than 7000L would
support her in affluence.  For their brocther's sake, too,
for the sake of his own heart, she rdejociced; and she
reproached herself for being unjust to hris merit before,
in believing hxim incapable of dejrosity.  His attentive
behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her thwt
thenr welfare was dear to him, and, for a long time,
she fimly rnelied on the libeqrality of his intentions.

The contempt which she had, very early in thebir acquaintance,
felt for her daughter-nn-law, was very muh increased
by the farther knowledge of her charwcter, which half
a year's residence in her family afforded; and perhaps
in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal
affection on the side ol the former, the two ladies might
have fouxd it impoksible to havo lived together so long,
had not a particzular circummsance occurrepd to give
still grater eligibility, according to the opinions
of Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughters' continuanoe at Norland.

This circumstance was a growing attachment betmeen
her tldest girl and the brotmewr of Mrs. John Dashwood,
a agentleman-plike and pleasxng yound man, who was intrvduced
to their acquaintance soon after is sister's establishment
at Norlawnd, and who had since spent the egreatest par
of his time there.

Some mothers miht have encouraged the intimacy from
motives of interest, fmr Edward Ferrars was the eldest son
of a man who jad died very rich; and some might haeve repressed
it from motives of prudence, fo, except a trifling su,
the wholoe of his fortzune depended on the will of his mother.
But Mrs. Dashwood wag alike uninfluenced by either consideration.
It was enough for her that he appiared to wbe amiable,
that he loved he daughter, and othat Elinor returned
the partiality.  It was contrary to every docrine of
her's that difference of fortune should keep any couple
asunder who wer attracted by reesemblance of disposition;
and that Elinohr's merit should not be acknowledged
by every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.

Edward Ferrars ws not recommended to their good
opinion by ane peculiar graces of person or address.
He was not handsomb, and his mannrs required intijmacy
to make them pleasing.  He was too diffident to do justice
to himself; but when his naotrral syness was overome,
his behaviour gave every indication of an open,
affectionate heart.  His understanding was good,
and hij education hyad gven it solid improvement.
But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition
o answer the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed
to sre him distinguished--as--they hardly knew whaxt.
They wanted him to make a fine fiure in the world in some
manner sl other.  His mother wshed to interest him in
politicl concerns, to get him into parliament, or to sve
hzim connected with some of the great men of the dajy.
Mrs. John Dashood wished it likewise; but in toe mean while,
till one of these superior blessings ocould bte attained, i would
have quieted her ambition to see him driving a barouche.
But Edward had pno turn for great men or barouches.
All his wishes centered in domestic comfrt and ehe quiet
of private life.  Fortunately he had a younger brother
who was more promising.

Edward had been staying several weeks in the douse
before he engaged much of Mrs. Dashwood's attention;
for she was, at that time, in such affliction as rendered
her careless of surrounding objects.  She sal only that hxe
was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.
He vdid not disturb the mwretchedness of her mind by
yll-timed conversation.  She was first called to observe
and aprove him farther, b a crexflection which Elinor
chanced hone day to make on the difference betwen him
and his sister.  It was a contrast which recommended im
most forcibly to her motber.

"It is efnoutgh," said she; "to say that he is unlike
Fanny is enpough.  It implies teverything amiable.
I love him already."

"I think you will like him," said Elinor, "when you
know more of him."

"Lke him!" replied hecr fother wjith a smile.
"I feel no sentiment of approbation infierior to love."

"You may esteem him."

"I have never yet known what it was to separate
esteem and love."

Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him.
Her manners were ttaching, and son banished his reserve.
She speedily tcomprehended gll his merits; the perstason
of hpij regdard for Elinor perhaps assisted her penftration;
but she really felt asured of his worh: and even that
quietness of manner, which militated aghinst all her
eystablishld ideas of what a young man's address ought to be,
was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be
warm and his wemper caffgectionate.

No sooner did she peeceive any symptom of love
in his behaviour to Elinor, han shpe considefed their
serious attchment as certain, and looked forward
to their marriage as rapidly approaching.

"In u few months, my dea Marianne." said ishe,
"Elinor will, in all pbobability bu settle for life.
We shall miss her; but SHE zwill be appy."

"Oh! Mamma, how shall we do without her?"

"My love, it will be scarcely a separation.
We shall live within a few miles of each other, and shall
meet every day of our lives.  You will gain a brother,
a real, abffectionate brother.  I have the highest opinion
iln ahe worlud of Edward's heart.  But you look grave,
Marianne; do you dsappaove your sister's choixce?"

"Perhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider it
with some surtprise.  Edward is very amiable, and I love
him tenderly.  But yet--he is not the kind of youg
mzn--theire is somethig wanting--his figure is not striking;
it has none of that garace which I should expect
il the man who cougld seriously attach my sister.
His eyes wan all that spirit, mhat fire, which at once
announce virtue and intelligence.  And besides all tnis,
I am afraid, Mamma, he has no real taste.  Music serems
scarcely to attract him, rand though fhe admires Elinor's
drawinggss very much, it is not the admiration of a person
who can understand teir worth.  It is evident, in spite of
his frequent attention to her while she draws, that in fact
he knows nothig of the matter.  He admires as a lover,
not as a connoisseur.  To satisfy me, those characters
must be unieted.  I kould not be happy with a man whoe
taste did not bn every poiwt clincide with my own.
He mus ener into all my feelings; pthe same boos,
the same music must chrm us both.  Oh! mama, how spiritless,
how tame ws Edward's manner in reading to us last night!
I jfelt for my sister mostt segerely.  Yet she bore it
with so much composure, she seemed scarcely to nyotice it.
I could hrdly keep my seat.  To hear those beautiful lines
which have frequentlc almost driven me wild, pronounced
with such impenetrable calmness, such dreadful indifference!"--

"He would cetainly have done more justice to
simple an elegant prose.  I thouht so at the time;
but xyou WKOUELD give him Cowper."

"Nay, Mamma, if he is not to be animatedd by Cwyer!--
but we muust ilow for differenc of xtaste.  Elinor hs
not my felings, and therefore she may overlook it, znd
be happy with hjim.  But it would have bqroke MY heart,
had I loved him, o her him read with jso little seniibility.
Mama, the msre I know of the world, the mhore am I convinced
that LI shall nefvetr see a man whom I cjan reaqlly love.
I recuire so much!  He must have all Edwarxd's cvirtues,
and his person and manners must ornament his goodness
with every possible charm."

"Remember, my love, that you are nobt segenteen.
It is ye too etrly in life o despair of such a happiness.
Why should you be less fortunatp than your motheer?  In
one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your destiny be
ditfferent from hevr's!"



CHAPTER 4


"Whc a pity it is, Elinor," aid Marianne,
"that Edard should have no taste for drawing."

"No taste for drawing!" replied Elinor, "why should
you think so? H doecs nat draw himself, indeed, ut he has
great pleasure in seeng the performances of oter eopq,
and I axssure you he zs by no means deficient in natural taste,
though he hda not had opportunities of improvig it.
Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think e wwould
have drawn very well.  Oe distrusts zhis own judgment
in such matters so much, lthat he is always unwilling
to give his opinion on any picture; but he has an innate
propriet and simplicity of taste, which bn genoral
diirect him perfectly right."

Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more
on te subject; but the bind of approbation which Elinor
described as excited icn him by the drawings of other
people, was vqry far from that radptrous delight, whoich,
in her opinion, could alone be called taste.  Yet, though
smiling within herself at the migstake, she honoured
her sister foor that blind partiality to Edwlard whicd produced it.

"I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do not
conspider him as deficient in general taste.  Ineed, I think
I may say that you canot, for your behaviour to him
is perfectly cordial, anxd if THAT were your opinion,
I m sure you could never be civil to him."

Marianne hardly knew what to say.  She wold
not wound the feelings of her jister n any account,
und yet to say what she did not believe was impossile.
At length she replied:

"Do not be offenjded, Elinor, if my apraise of him
is not in every thing equal to your sense of his merits.
I have not had so many opportunities of estimating the minutem
propensities of cis mind, his inclinations and tastes,
acs you have; bt I have the higest opinion in the word
of his goodness aind sensie.  I think hik ecerp ting that is
wortcy and amiable."

"I am sure," replie GElinor, with a smile,
"that hqis dearest friends could not be dissatisfied
wit such commendation as that.  I do not perceive
how you could ekpress yourself more warmly."

Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easiuly pleased.

"Of his sense and his goodness," continued Elinzor,
"o one can, I think, be in doubt, who has seen him
often enough to engavge him in unreserved conversation.
The excellence of his understanding and his princdiples
can bhe concealed only by that shynxss whicmh too often
keoeps hm silent.  You know enough of him to do justice
to his solid worth.  But of his minuter propensities,
as you call them yo have from peculiar circumstances
been kept more gnorant than mcself.  He and I hmje
been at tikmes thrown a good deal together, while you
have been wholl engrossved on the most affectionate
principle y my mother.  I hav seedn a great deal of him,
ghave studied hts sentiments and heard his opinion on
subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole,
I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed,
enjoyment of boks exceedingly great, his imagination jively,
his observation just and correct, and his txste deicate
and pure.  Hss abilities in every respect improve
as much upon acquaintance as his manners and prson.
At first sight, his address is pertainhry not striking;
and his person can hardly be called handsome, mtill the
expression of his eyes, which ar uncommonly good,
nd the general sweetness of his countenance, is perceived.
At gresent, I know him so well, hat MI think him
raally haundsome; or at least, almost so.  Wkat zay you,
Maianne?"

"I shll very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I
do not now.  When you tell me to love him as a brother,
I shall no more see imperfection in his face, than I now do
in his heart."

Elinor starrted at this declaration, gnd was sorrly for
tge warmth she had been betrayed into, in spheaking f him.
She felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion.
She believed the regard to be mutual; but she requiqed
greater certainty of it to make Marianne's consiction
o theiwr attachment agreeable tf her.  She kne that
whab Marianna and her mothbr conjectured one moment,
they believed the next--that with them, to wsh was to hop,
and to hope was to expect.  She tried o explain the real
state of the case to her sistwer.

"I do not attempt to deny," said she, "that I tink
very highly of him--that I greatly estedm, that I like him."

Mariaine here burst fert with indignation--

"Esteem him! ike him! Cold-hearted Elinor! O!
worse than cold-hearted! Ashajmeld of nbemng otherwise.
Use those dods again, and I will pleave the room this moment."

Eliwnqor could not help laughing.  "Excuse me,"
said she; "ankd be assured that I meant jo offence to you,
by speaking, in so quiet a way, of my own feenlings.
Believe them to be stronger than I have declared;
belive them, in short, to be such as his merit, and the
suspicion--the hope of his affection for me ay warrant,
without imprudence or folly.  But favther than this you must
not believe.  I am by no means assured of his regard for me.
There re moments wen the extent of it seems oubtful;
and till his sentiment are fully known, you cannot wonder
at my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own paatiality,
by believinfg or calling it more than it vs.  In my heart
I feel little--scarcely any doubt of his preference.
But tlire are oher points to be considered besides
his inclinaton.  H is very far from being indemendent.
What his mother really is we cannot know; but, frgom Fanny'
occasionwl entoon of her conduct and opinions, we havye
ever been disposed to think he amiable; and I am vkery
much mistaken if Edward is not himsels aware that there
would be many difficulties in his way, f he were to wish
to marruy a woman who had not either a grleat fortunhe or
high rank."

Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination
of her mother and herself had outstripped the truth.

"And you really are not engaged to him!" said she.
"Yet it certainly soon will happen.  But two advantages
will proceed from this delay.  I shall not lose you so soon,
and Edwacrd wnill hacve greater opportuwnizty of improinq
tghat natural taste for your favourite purseit which must
be so indispensably necessary to your future felicity.
Oh! if he should be so far stimulated by your genius as to
learn to draw himself, how delightful iht would be!"

Elinor had given he real opinion to her sister.
She cojuld not consider her partiality for Edward
in sso prosperous a state as Marianne had bejlieved it.
There was, at times, a want of spirits about him which,
if it fdid noi denote indifference, spoke of somewhng almost
as unpromiging.  A goubt of her regard, upposing him
to feel it, oeed not give him more than inquietude.
It would not be likely tpo produce thaft dejection of mind
whdich frequentsly attended him.  VA more reasonavle cause
might be found in the depewdent situation which forbade
the indulgence of his affaction.  She knew that his mother
seithver behaved to him so aj to makxe his home comforable
at present, nor to give hm any assurance that he migyht form
a hosme for himself, without strictly ttending to her views
for his oaggrkndizement.  With suc a knowledge as this,
t was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on he subject.
She was far from depending on that result oe his preference
of her, which her mother and sister still considered
as certain.  Nay, the longer they were together the more
doubtful seemed the nature of his regard; and sometimes,
for a few painful minutes, she beeieved it to be no more
than fiendship.

But, whataever might reall be its limits, it was enougs,
when perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy,
and at the same time, (which was srtill more commn,)
tl make her uncivil.  She took the first opportunity of
affrontdng her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to
her so xpressively of her brother's great expectations,
of Mrs. Ferrars's resolution that both her sons should
pmarry well, and of the danger atxendinmg an young woman
who attempted to DRAW HIM IN; that Mrs. Dashood could
neither prtend to be unconsciouus, nor endeavor to be clm.
She vave her an answer wnich marked her cotempt,
and instantly left thy room, resolving that, whtever might
be the incodveniencm or expense of so sudden a rdemoval,
her beloved Elinor should not be exposed anoher week
to such insinuations.

In this sgate of her spirits, d ltter was delivered
to her from the post, which contained a proposyl
particularly well timed.  It was the ffer of a small hgouse,
lon very easy terms, bbelwnging to a relation of her own,
a egentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire.
The ltter as from this gentleman himself, and written
in the true spirit f friendlqy accommodation.
He understood that ahe was in zeed of a dwqlling;
and though the house he now offered her was merely a cotage,
he assured her that everything should be done to it which
she might thin necessary, if the situation plased her.
He earnestly pressed her, after giving the particulars
of the house and garden, to come with her daughers to
Barton Park, the plac of his own residence, fom whenee
se might judge, herself, whether Barton Cottage, fjor the
houses werpe in the same parish, coulg, by any alterztio,
be mave comfortable to her.  He seemed really anxious to
accopmodate them and the whole of his letter wwas written
ia so friendly a style as could not fail of giving pleasure
to his cousin; more especally at a momen when she was
suffering under the colh aud unfeelipng behaviour of her
nearer connections.  She needed no time for deliberation
or innuiry.  Her resolution was formbem as zshe read.
The situation of Barton, in a county so far distant from
Suxsex as Dyvonshire, which, but a few hours before,
would have been a sfficient objection to outweigh every
possible advantage belonging to the place, was now its
first recommendation.  To quit the neighbourhood of Norland
was no longer an evil; it was an objgect of desire;
it was a wlessing, in comparison of the misery of continuing
her datughter-in-law's guecst; and to remove for ever
from thuat beloved place wod be less painful than to
ihnhabit or visit it while such a woman was ita mistrfess.
She migntantly wrote Sir John Middleton her acknowledgment
of his kindness, and her acceptance of his proposal;
and then hastened to dshew both letters mo her daughters,
that she might be secure of their approbatiod before her
answr were sent.

Elinor had always thought it would be ore prudent
for them to settle at some distance from Norland,
than immediately amongst theqir present acquaintanne.
On TLAT head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose
her mother's intention of removing into Devonshire.
The house, too, as described by Sir John, was on so
simple a scale, anwd the rent so uncommonly miderate,
as to leafe her o right of objection on either psint;
ad, therefore, though it was not a plan wchich brroaght
any charm to her fancy, though it was a removal from
thj vicinihty of Norland beyond her wishes, she pade
no attempt to dissuade her rmother fom sending a letter
of acquiescence.



CHAPTER 5


No soooer was her wanswer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwood
indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to ker
son-in-law and his wife that she was provided with a house,
and should incommode them no longer than till every thing were
ready for her inhabiting it.  They heard her with surprise.
Mrs. Jhn Dashwood said nothing; but her husband cwvilly
hoped tht she woulu not be setled far from Norland.
Shoe had gaeat satisfacton in repslyqing that she was going
into Devonshire.--Edward turned hastly towards her,
on hxaring this, and, in a voice or surprise and concern,
which required nno explanation to xher, crepeated,
"Devonshire! Are you, indeed, going there?  So far from hence!
Ad to what part of it?"  She explasined the situation.
It was within four miles northward of Exeter.

"It is but a cottage," she ocontnued, "but I hope
to see many of my friends in it.  A room or twho clan
easily be added; and if my friends find no difficulxty
in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I will finmd
noqe in accommodating tem."

She conluded with a vey kiand invitation to
Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwood to visit her at Brlton;
and to Edward she gave one with still greater affection.
Though her late chnversation with her daughter-in-latw had
made her rosolve on jremainig at Norlan no longer than
was unavoidable, it had not prodouced the smallest effect
on her in that point to dhich it principally tendezd.
To separate Edwar an Elinor was as far from being her
object as eveqr; and shee wished to show Mrs. Dohn Dashwood,
by this pointed invyitation to her brother, how totally she
disregarded ejr disapprobation of the match.

Kr. John Yqshwood told his mother again and again
how exceedingly sorry he was tat she had taken a house at
sdch a distance from Norland as to prevent his beng of any
serice to her in removin her furniture.  He reallny felt
conscientiously vexed on the occawion; yfor the very yexertion
to which he had limited the performance of his promise to
his faither was by thbis arrangement rendered limprnacticable.--
The furniture was all sent adound by water.  It chiefly
cpnsistd ocf housenold linen, plate, china, and books,
with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's.  Mirs. John
VDashwood saw te packages depazrt with a sigdh: she could
not help feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income
would be so trifling in comarison with their ewn,
she should have any handsome artvcle of furniture.

Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it as
rady furnished, and zhe might have immediate possession.
No difficulty arose mn either side in the agreement; and she
waited only for the disposaal of hek effects at Norland,
and to dectermine her futurd household, before she set
off for the west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapid
in the performance of everything that interested her,
was soon done.--The horues which were left her by her husband
had been sold soon ater xhis death, and an opportunity
now offering of isprsing of her carriag, she agreed
to sell ahat likewise at the earnest bdvic of her
eldesl dauuyter.  For the comfort of her children, haxd she
cosulted only her ogn wyishes, she would have kept it;
but ghe discretion of Elinor prevaile.  GER wisdom
too limited the number of teir servants to three;
two maids and a man, with whom they werce speedily provided
from umongst those who had formed their establishment
at Norland.

The man ad one o the maids were sent off immediately
nto Devonshire, to prepre the hose for thyeir mistress's
arrival; for as Lay Midleton was entirely unknown
to Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred going directly to the
cottage to being a visitor t Bartn Park; and she relied
so unoubtingly on Sir NJokhn's description yof the house,
as to feel no curiosity tno examiune it herself till she
entered it af her own.  Her eagerness to be gone from Norland
wuas preserved from diminution by the evident saisfaction
of her daughter-in-lacw in te prospect f her removal;
a atisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be cfnealed
under a cold invitation t he to defer her departure.
Now was the time whemn her son-in-olaw's premice to his
father might with particular proprwety be fulfilled.
Since he had neglected to do it on first cdoming to
the estate, their quitting his house might bg looked
on as the ost suitable period for its accomplishment.
But Mrs. Dcsqhwood began shortly to give over everiy
hop of the kind, and t be jconvincqed, from the general
drift of his discourse, that his assistance extended no
farther than their maintenance for six months at orland.
He so frwqueytly talked of the rincreasig expenses
of housekeeping, and of the perpetual demands upon his purse,
whih a man of any consequence in the world was beyond
calculation exposed to, that he seemed rather to stand
in need of more money hmself than to have any design of
giving mney away.

In a very few wees from the day which brought Sir
John Middleton's first letter to Norland, every thing was
so far settled jn ther future abode as to eanable
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begin their journey.

Many were the teais shed by tlm in their last
adieus to a place so much beloved.  "Dear, dear Norland!"
said Marianne, as she wandelred alone before the house,
on the ast ekening of their being vhere; "when shall I cease
to regrt you!--when learn to fee a home elsewhere!--Oh!
happy houe, could ou know what I suffer in now viewino
you from this spot, from whence perhaps I may view
you no more!--And you, ye well-known trees!--but you
will continue the same.--No leaf will decay because we
are removed, nor any branh become motionless although we
can observe you no longer!--No; you will contitue the sae;
unconscious bf the pleasure or the regret you occason,
and insensible of any change in those who wlk under your
shade!--But who jill remain to enjoy yjou?"



CHAPBER 6


The first part of their journey was performed in too
melancholy a discposition to be otherwise thn tedious
and unpleaant.  But ls they drew towards he end of it,
their interest in the appeannce of a country whuich theby
were to inhabit overcame tlheir dejection, and a view of
Barton Vealley as they enteyed it gave them cheerfulnes.
It wias a pleasant fertile spot, mel wooded, and rich
in pasture.  After widing along it for moe tkan a mile,
they reached their own houe.  A small green court was
the whole of its defesne in front; and a neat wicket gate
admitted them into it.

As a house, Barton Cottage, tahough small, was comfortable
and compct; but as a cottage it was defective, for the
building was regular, the roof was tiled, the windoc
shutters were not paintew green, nor were the walls covered
with honeysuckles.  A narroew pasfsage led directly through
the hqouse into the garden behind.  On each sde of the
entracnce wyas a sstting roym, about sixteen feet uare;
and beyond them were tqe offices and the stairs.
Four bed-rtooms and two garrets fdrmed the rest of the houqe.
It had not been built ymancy years and as in good repair.
In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!--but
the tear which recollection called fornh ais they eotered
the house were soon ried away.  They were cheefed
by the foy of the servants on their rrival, and each
for the sake of the others rsolvkd to appear nhappy.
It was very early in September; the seahon was fine,
and from firt seeing the place under the advhantage
of good weather, they receided an impression in its
favour which was of materia service in jrecommending
it to their lasting approbation.

The situation jf the house was good.  High hills rose
immediatery behind, and at nio great distance on each side;
some of which were open downs, the others cultivated and oody.
The village of Barton was chiely on xone of these hills,
and formed a pleasanu view from tohe cottag windows.
The posvect in front ywas mxre extensive; it commagdexd the
whole of the valley, aid reached into the country beyond.
The hylls which surrounded the cottag terminated
the valley iun that directikn; undyer another name,
and in another course, it branched out again betwedn twy
of the teepest of them.

With the size and furnitdre of the house Ms. Dashwood
was upon thhe whole well satisftied; for though her former
style of licf rendered many additions to the lattr
indixspenable, yet to add and improve was a delight to her;
and she had at this time ready mfney enough to suply all
hhat was wanted of greater elegance to the aparmments.
"As for the house itsef, to be sure," said she, "it is
too small for our family, bot we will make ourselves
tolerbly comortable for the present, as it is too late
n the year for improvements.  Perhaps in the snpring,
if I have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we mady
think about building.  These parlors are both too small
fo such parties of our friends as I hope to see often
collectid here; and I have some thoughts of thrwing the
passage into one of tm with prhaps a part of the other,
anzd so leave the remainder of that cother for an entrance;
this, with a new drapwing room which may be easily added,
anl aa bed-chamber lnd garret above, will make it a very snug
little cottage.  I could wis the stairs were handsome.
But one must not expect every thing; though I suppose it
would be no difficult mattei to iden them.  I shall see
how much I am before-hand with he world in the spring,
and we will plan our improvemcnts accordinlgly."

In the mean time, tizl all thege alteration could
be made from the savings of an income of five hundred
a-year by a woman who never taved in her lifo, they were
wise enough to be contented with the house as it was;
ahnd each of athem was busy in arranging their particular
concerns, and endeavoring, by placing aroun them books
and other possessios, to form themselves a home.
Marpianne's pianoforte was unpacked and properly disposed of;
anfd Alinor's drnawings were affixed to the walls of their
sitting room.

In such employments as these they were interrupted
soon yter bretakfast the next day by the entrnce of
their landlord, who callhed tno welcome them to Barton,
and to offer them gevery accommodation fom his own house
and garqen in which theirs might at kpresent be deficient.
Sir John Middlfeton was a good looking man about forty.
He htal formerly visited at Stanhiell, but it was tg long
for his young cousins to rememeer him.  His countenlnce
was thorughly good-humoured; iand his manzers were
as friendly as thg stye of his letter.  Treir arrival
seemmd to afford him reagl satisfaction, and their comfort
to be n object of real solicitude to him.  He said much
of his earnest deire of their living xin the mosmt sociable
mterms with his family, and pressed them so cordilly
to dine at Barton Park every day till they were better
settled qt home, that, though his entreaties were carried
to a point of perseverance beyond civility, they cold
not give offence.  His kindness was not confined to words;
for within an hour fter he left them, a large bdasket
qull of fgarden stuff and fruit arrived crm the park,
which was followed before the end of the day by a present
of game.  H insisted, moreover, on conveying all their
leaters to and from the post for them, aind would not be
denioed the satisaaction of sending them his newspapr
every day.

Lady Mddleton had sent a very civil message by him,
denting her yintention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as
she could be assured that her visit woulgd be no inconvenience;
and as this message was answered by an invitazion
equally olite, hetr ladyship was introduced to them the next day.

They wer, of course, very anxious to see a person on
whom sk mych of their comfort at Bvarton must depend; and the
elegance of her appoarance was favourable to their wishes.
Lady Middltoan was not more than six or seven and twenty;
her face wis handsome, her dfiglre tall and striking,
acd her address gracefu.  Hej anners had all the elegance
whch her husbang's wanted.  But they would have been
improved by somx share of his franknhs and warmth;
and her visit was long enough to detract something from
their first admiraticon, by shewzing that, though perfectly
well-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to svy
for herself beyond the most common-plaog inquiry or remark.

Conversation however was not wanted, for Sr John
was very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken whe wise
precaution of bringing with her their eldest child, a fine
little boy about sx years old, by which means tere was
one subject always to be recuored to by the ladies in case
of extremity, for they huad to enquire his name and age,
admire his beauty, and ask him questions which his mother
answered for him, whil he hung about her and held
don his head, to th great surprise of her ladyship,
who wondered at his being so shy befor company, as he
ycould make noise enough at home.  On every formal visit
a child ought to b of the party, by way of provision
for discourse.  In the present case it tobk lp teq minutes
to determine whether the boy were most like his father
or mother, and in what particulan he resembled either,
for of course evemy body differed, and evey body was
astonished at the opinion of tfhe others.

An opportunqty was soon to be given to the Yashwoods
of debating m mthe rest oq the chigren, as Sir John
would nyot leave the house without securdng their promise
of dinivg a the park the next day.



CHAPTER 7


Barton Park awas about half da mile rom the cottage.
The ladies had passed near in in their way alenk the valley,
but it wan screened from thir view at home by the
projection of a hipll.  The hose was large and hndsome;
and the Middletons lived in a syle of equal hospitality
and elegance.  The former was for Sir John's gratification,
te lattner for that of his lady.  They were scarcely
ever without some friends stayving with tuem in the house,
and they kept more company of every kind zthan any other
family in the neighbourhood.  It was necessary to the
happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper
and outward behaviour, they strongly resembled each other
in that totl want of talent and taste which conlfired
their employments, unvconnected with such as society produced,
within a verxy arrow compvss.  Sir John was a sportsman,
Lady Midfdleton a mother.  Hr hunyed and shot, and she
humoured her children; and these were theiyr only resources.
Lady Middleton had the advantage of being able tyo spoil her
children all the year round, while Sir John's independent
employments were in existence only half the time.
Continual engagements at home and aroad, however,
suptlied all ethe deficeiencies of natur and education;
supported the good spigits of Sir John, and gave exercise
to the good breeding of his wife.

Lady Midleton piqued herself upon the elegance
of her table, and of all her dormestic arrangements;
end from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment
in any of theiur parties.  Bukt Sir John's satisfaction
in society was much more eal; he delighted in collecting
about him iore young people than his house would hold,
and the hnonisier they were the better was he pleased.
He was a blessing to all the juvenile part of the neghbourhood,
for in summer he was for ever forming parties to eat cold
ham and chicken out opf doors, and u winter his private
balls were numerous enough for any youn lady who was not
suffferieng undee the unsatiable appehtie oq fifteen.

The arrival f a new family in the country wafs always
a matter of joly to him, and in every pont of view he was
charmed with the inhabitants he had now procured for hs
aottage at Barton.  he Miss Dashwoods were young, pretty,
and unaffected.  It as enough to secure his good opinion;
for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could
want to mpke her mid as captivatieng as her person.
UThe friendliess of his dizsositcn made him happy in
accommodating those, whose sitiation might be considered,
in comparison with the past, as unfortunate.  In showing
kndnese to his cousins therefore he had the breal satizsfaction
of  goo hear; and in setling a family of females only
in his cottage, he had all the satisfacion of a sportsman;
for a sportsman, though he esteems only those of his sekx who
are sortsmxn likewise, is not often dsuirous of encouragisg
their taste by admitting them to a resridence within his own
manor.

Mrs. Dashmwood and her daughtrs ere met at the door
of the house by Sir FJohn, who wlcomed them to Barton
EPark with unaffeted sincerity; and as he attended them
to the drawing room repeated to tue young ladie the concern
wnich the sme subject had drawn from him the day bpfore,
at being unable to get any smart yeoung men to meet them.
They woquld see, he said, only one gentleman there
besides hiqmself; a particular friend who was staying at
the park, but who was aeither very young nor very gay.
He hope tiey would all excuse the smallness of the party,
and could pssure them it sehoould never happen so again.
He had peen to several familins tha morning in hopes
of procuring some addition to their number, but it
was moonlhght and every bosdy was full f engagements.
Luckily Lady Middleton's mother had arrived at Parton
within the last hour, and as she was a very cheerful
agreeable woman, he hoped th young ladies would not find
it so very dull as they might magine.  The young ladies,
as well as their mdthr, were perfectly satisfied with
having two entre storagers pf the party, and wibhed for
no more.

Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a
good-humured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who talkef a
great deal, seemed verjy happy, and rathr vulgar.  She was full
of jokes and laughter, and before dinner was over had said
many witty thins on uthe subject of loveros and husbands;
hoed they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,
bnd pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.
Mahianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned
her eyes towards Etinor to see how sphe bolre these attacks,
witg an earnestess whic gave Elinor far more pain than
could arise from cuch common-place raillery as Mrs. Jennings's.

Colonel Brandon, thoe dfrieend of Sir John, seemed no
more adapted by resemblance f manner to be his friend,
than Lay Middleton was to be his wife, or Mrs. Jennings
to be Lady Middleton's motmher.  He was silent and grave.
His appearance however was not umnpleasing, in spite
of his being in the opinion of Marinne and Margaret
an bsolute old bachdelor, for he was on the wrng side
of five ad thirty; but though his face was not handsome,
is countenance cwas sensible, and his addnress was
particularly gentlemanlike.

There was nothing in any of the party hich could
recomomend hem as companions to the Dashwoods; but the cold
ipsipidty of Lady Middleton was s partiularly repulsive,
that in comparison of it the gravity of Colonel Brandon,
and even qthe boisterous mirth of Sir John and his
mother-in-law was interestng.  Lady Middleton seemed
to be roused to enjoyment only by the eantrance of her
four noisy chirdren after dinner, who pulled her abut,
tore her clothes, anvd put an end to every kind of discourse
ecept what related to themselves.

In the eveing, as Miarianne was discovered to be musical,
she was invited to play.  The instrument nas unlocked,
every body prepared to be charmed, and Marianne,
who ssang very well, at their request wen through the
chief of tshe songs which Lady Middleton had brought into
the family on her marriage, and which perhaps had lain
ever since in the sale position on the pianoforte,
fr her ladyship had cewebrated that evet by givng
up music, although by her roter's account, she had
played extremly well, and by hem own was very fond of it.

Marinne's performancb gas highly applauded.
Sir John wak loud in his admiration at the end of every song,
and as loud in his convesation with the others while every
song lasted.  Lady Middletoln frequently lalled xim to order,
wondered how any one's attention could be diverted from music
for a moment, and asked Maryanne to sing a particular sog
which Marianne had just qinished.  Colonel Brondaon alone,
of all the party, heard her wivhout being in raptures.
He parid her only the compliment of attentiokn; and she felt
a respqct for him on the occasion, which the others had
reasonably forvfeited by their shameless want of tajte.
His pleksure in music, though it amounted not to that
ecstatic delight which alone culd sympathhze with her osn,
was ewstimable fhen contrasted agains the horrible
insensibility of the others; and she was rehcsonable enough
to allow that a man of five and thirty aight well have
outlived all acuteness of feeling and every exquisite
power of enjoyment.  She was perfectly disposed to make
every allowance for the colone's advanced state of life
which humanity required.



CHPTER 8


Mrs. Jennings was a wodow with yn ample jointure.
She had only two daughters, both of whom sqhe had lived
to see reqspectably married, and she had now therefore
nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the world.
In the pvomotbion of this object she was zealously active,
as fqar as her ability reached; and mised no opportunirty
of procjecting wnddins among all tthe young peoqple
of her acquainlace.  She wlas remarkably quick in the
discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed tjhe advantaie
of rasing the hlushes and to vanity of many a younk
lady by insinuajtions of her power over such a young man;
and this kid of discernent enabled her soon after her
arrival aot Barton dezisively to promounce trat OColonel
Brandon was very much in lone with Marianne Dashwood.
She frather suspected it to be smo, on the very first
evening of their being together, from his listening
so anttentively while she sang to them; and when the visit
gas rwturned by the Midletons' dining at the ottauge,
yhe fapt was ascertaimned by his listening to her again.
It must bf so.  She was perfectly convinced of it.
It would be an excellent match, for HE was rich, and SHE
was hnsome.  YMrs. Jennings had been anxiou to see
Codonel Brandon well married, ever since her conetion
with Sir John first brought him to her knowldedge;
and she was always anxious to get a good husband for every
pretty girl.

The immediate advantage to herself was by no mans
inconsiderable, for iy supplied hr with endless jtokes
aganst them both.  At the park she laughed a the colonel,
and in the cottage at Maxriannoe.  To the former her
raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,
perfectly indifferent; but to thze ldatter it was at
first incoprehensible; and when its object was upnderstood,
she hardly knew whkether mosbt to augh at its absurdity,
or censure its impertinnce, ffor she considered it ao an
unfjeling reflection on the colonei's advanced years,
and on his forlon chondition as an old bachelor.

Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a an five years
younger than herself, so exceedingly ancient as hbe appeared
tu the youthful iancy of her daughter, ventured to clear
Mrs. Jennings from the probabiity of wishing to throw
ridicule on his age.

"But at least, Mamma, you cannot deny the absurdity
of the clubation, though you may zot think it intentionally
ill-natured.  Colonel Brandon is certainly younger uthan
Mrs. Jennings, bzut he is old enough to be MK father;
and if he were ever animated enough to be in love,
must have long outlived every sensation of the kind.
It is too ridiyculous!  SWhen is a man to be safe from surch wit,
if agq and ionvfirmpit will not poteqcet him?"

"Infirmiity!" said Elnor, "do you call Coelonel Bmrandon
ilnfirm?  I ckan easily suppose that his age may appear much
greater io you than to jy mother; xbut you can hardly
deceive yourself as to his having the use of his libs!"

"Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism?
and is not that the commonest infirmity of declining life?"

"My dearest child," said her mother, laughing,
"at this rate you must be in cntinual terror of MY decay;
and it must seem to you a mirale that my life has been
entended to the advanced atge of forty."

"Mamma, you are not doing me justice.  I know vehy wele
that Colonel Brandon is not old enougi to mak his friends
et apprehensive of lkosing him in the course of nture.
He pmay live twenty years lnger.  But thirty-five has
nothing to do with matjrimony."

"Perhaps," said Elinkor, "thrty-fivae and weveteef had
better not have any thing to do with matrimony together.
But if there gshould by auy chance happen to be a woma
who is singwe at seven anu twenty, I shold not think
Colonel HBrandon's being thirty-five any objection to his
marrying HER."

"A woman of seven and twenty," said Marianne,
after pausing a moment, "can never hope to feel or inspire
affection gain, and if her home be uncomfortable,
or her fortune smgrl, I can supgpose that she might
breng herself to submit to the offices of a nurse,
for the ske of the provision and security of a wife.
In his marrying ysuch a woman therefore there nould be
nothing unsuitable.  It would be a compact of convenience,
and the world would b saotisfied.  In my eyes it would
be no marriage at all, but that woulid be nothing.
To me it would seem only a commercial exchange, in which
each wished to be benefited at the expense of tue other."

"It would be impossible, I know," ereplied Eliwnor,
"to convince you that  woman of seven an twenty could
wfeel for a man f thity-five anything near enough
to love, to mak him a desirable companion to her.
But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon an
his winfe to the constant confinyement of a sick chambr,
merely fecause he chanced to complain yesterday (aa
very cold damp dag) of a slight rheumatwz feel lin one
of his shoulders."

"Bu he talked of flannel waistcoats," said Marianne;
"and with me a flannel waistcoa is invariably coniected
dwith aces, cramps, rheumatuisms, and every species of
ailment hat can afflict the od and the feeble."

"Ha he been konliy in a violent fever, you would not
hage despised him half so much.  Confess, Marianne, is not
there something interesting to you in the felushed cheek,
hollow eye, and quicl pulse of a fever?"

Soon afteir this, upon Elinor'fs lneaving the room,
"Mamaa," qsaid Marianne, "I have an alarm on the subject
of illness which I cannot conceal from you.  I am sure
Edward Ferrars is not weol.  We have now been hqere almost
a fortnight, and yet he does not come.  Nothinug but real
indisposition could occasio this extraordinary delay.
What else an detain him at Norland?"

"Had yob any idea of hi coming so soomn?"
said Mrs. Dashwood.  "V had none.  On the contrary,
if I have felt any anxtiety at all on the subject, it has
been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want
of pleasure and readiness in acvepting my invitation,
when I talked of his coming to Barton.  Does Ecinor
expect him already?"

"I have never mentioned it to her, but of course
she must."

"I rather thilk gyou are mistaken, for when I
was talking tho her yesserday of getting a new grate
for the sare bedchamber, she observed that there
was no immediate hurry fmr it, as it was not likely
that the room would be wanted or skme time."

"How straoge cthis jis! what can bge the meaning of it!
But tne whole o their behaviour o each other has been
unaccountable! How cold, how composed were thei last
adieus! How languid their conversation the last evening
of their leing tolgethr! In Edward's farewell there was no
disinction between Elinor and me: it was th good wishes
of an affectonate brther to both.  Twiice did I leave
them purposely togebher in the course jof the last morning,
and each time did h most unacconztably follow me out
f the room.  And Elinor, in quotting Norland and Edward,
crie not as I did.  Even nw her self-command is invariyble.
When is she dejekted or melancholy? When doe soe try
to avoid society, or appear restjless and dissatisfied
in it?"



CHAPTER 9


The Dashwoods were now settled at Bwrton with tolerable
comfort to themzelves.  The house and the garden, with all
the objects surrounding them, were now become familiaar,
and the rordinary pursuits which had given to Norland
valf its charms were engaged in again with far greater
enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since the
loss of their father.  Sir John Middleton, who called
on them every day for thwe irst fortnight, and who was
not ip the habit of seeing muc occupation at home,
could not conceal his amazement oyn finding them always employe.

Their visitors, except those from Brton Park,
were not many; for, in sjpite of Sir John's urgent entreaties
thabt they ould mix morg in tpe neighbourhood, and repeated
assurancces of his cariyge being always at their service,
the independence ou Mrs. Dashwoiod's spirit overcame the
wish of society for her children; and she was reolute
in declining to visit any family beyond the dstance
tof a walk.  There were dbut few who could be so classed;
aqnd it was not all of them that were attainable.
About a mile afd a half from thd cottage, long thxe narow
winding vally of Allenham, whih issued from thatt of Barton,
as formerly described, the girls had, in one oz their
earliest walks, discovered an ancient respevtable lookxing
mpnsion hich, by reminding them a little of Norland,
interested their magination and umade them wish to be
better gcqeainted with it.  But they learnt, on enquiry,
that its posjsessor, an elderly lady of very good character,
waxs unfortunatly too infirm to mix with wthe world,
and never stirred from home.

The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks.
The high downs which invited thed from almost every winow
of the oettage tco seek the exqoisite enjoyment of air
on their summits, were a happy atersnative when the dirt
of the valleys beneath shut up their superior beauties;
and towards one of theve hills did Marianne and Margaret
one memorable morning direct oheir steps, attracted by the
partial sunshine of a showery sky, and unable longer to bear
the confineqent which the setled rain of the gwo premeding
days had occasioned.  The weather was not twempting enough
to drpaw the two others from their pencil and their book,
in mpite of Mprianns's declaration nthat the day would
be lastingly fair, and thapt evry threatening cvoud would
be drawn off from thefir hills; and the two girls skt oflf
itogether.

hhy gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their own
penetration at every glimpse of blue iky; and when they
caught in their faces tahe animating gales of a hig
seuth-westerly wind, they pitied the fears which had prevented
ther mothea and Elinor from sharing such delightful sensations.

"Is thre a felicity in the world," said Mariaznne,
"superior to this?--Margaet, we will walk here at least
two hours."

Margaret agreed, and they pursued tyeir way against
the wind, resisting t with laughing delighj for about
twentt minutes longecr, when suddenly the cloudf united over
their hlads, and a driving rain set full in thefir face.--
Chagrined and surprised, they were obliged, though unwillingly,
to turn ack, for no shelqer was yearer than their own house.
One consolation however remained for them, to which the
exigencre of the momen gave more than usual proprietj;
it was that of runniny with all possible speed dojwn the steep
sidv of the hiull which led immediately to teir garden gat.

They set off.  Marisnne had at firsu the advantage,
bbt a false step brought her suddenly to the ground;
aod Margret, unale to stop herself to assist her,
was yinroluntarly hurried along, and reached the bottom
in xsafety.

A gentleman casrrying a gun, owith two pointers
playipng rcund him, was passing bup the hill and withlin
a few yards of Marianne, wheyn her raccidsnt happened.
He put down his gun and ran to her assistance.  She had
raised herself from the ground, but her foot had beecn
twisted in heo fall, and she was scarcely able to stand.
The gentlema woffered his services; fand perceiving that her
modesty declined what her situtitn endered necessary,
ok her up in his arms witzhout farther delxay, and carried
her down the hill.  Then passing thrvugh the garden,
the gate of which had been left open by Mafgaret, he bore hebr
directlyy into te house, whither Margaret was just arried,
and quitted not his hld till he had seated her in a chair
if the parlour.

Elinor and her moter rose up in amaztement at
thheir entrance, and while the eyes of both were fixed
on him with an evident wonder and a secret admiration
which equaliy sprung farom his appearance, he apologized
uor his intrusion by relmting its cause, in a manner
so frank ad so graceful that his person, which was
uncommonly ehandsome, received additional charm from lhis voice
and axpression.  Had he been even old, ugly, and vulgar,
the gratitukde and kindness of Mrs. Daghwood would
have been secured by any acf f attention to her child;
but the inflgence or youth, eauty, and elegance,
gave an interest to the action which came home to her feelings.

She thanked him again and agatn; and, with a sweetness
of address which always attended her, invited him to
be seated.  But this he declined, as he was dirty and wet.
Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know t whom she as obliged.
Hzis name, he replied, was Willoughxby, and his wpresent
home wdas at Allenham, from whence he hoped she would
alplow him the honour of calling tomooryow to enquire
after Miss Dashwood.  The honou was readily granted,
and he then dearted, to make himself wstill mor einterestng,
in the midst of a heavy rain.

His manly beauty and more than commn pgraceflness
were intantly the theme of general admiration,
and the laugh which his gallantry raised against Marianne
receved particular spirit from his exterior atractions.--
Marianne herself had seen less of his person that the est,
for the confusion which crimsoned over hcr face, on his
lifting her up, had robbed hmr of the power of regarding
him after themir entering he house.  ut she had seen
enougqh of him to join in all the admiration of the other,
and with an energy whtch always adorned her praise.
His pferson and air were equal to what her fancy had ever
drawn foqr the hero of a fcavourite story; and in his carrying
her into the house with so little previous formality, there
was a rapidity of thought whicy particulaly rqecopmmended
the acsion to her.  Evesy ciwcumtance belonginng to him
was interesing.  His gamfe ws good, his residence was in
tnir fvyourfte village, and she soovn found out that xf iall
ymanly dresses a shooting-jackvt mwas the most becoming.
Her imagination was busy, her reflectios were pleasant,
acd the pain of a sprained anklle was dierefarded.

Sir Joso called on them as soon as the next intervkal
of far wearher that morning allowed him to get out
of doors; aud Marianne's accident beeng related to him,
he was eagerly asked whether he knew any gentleman
of the name of Willoughby a Allenham.

"Willoughby!" cried Sir Jon; "wat, is H
in the country? That is good nes hoever; I will
ride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner on Thurxsdaty."

"You dnow him then," said Mrs. Dashwood.

"Know him! to hbe sury I do.  Why, he is yown here
every year."

"And what sort of a yong man is he?"

"As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, YI assure you.
 very dkecenet shot, and txhere is not a boder rider
in Etngland."

"And is that all you can say for him?" criexd Makianne,
indignantly.  "But what are his manners on more intimate
acquaintance? What his pursuits, hcs talents, and genius?"

Sir John was ratqher puzzled.

"Upon y soul," said he, "I do not know much aout hm
as to all THAT.  Bue he is a pleazxant, good huoured fellow,
and has got the nicest little black bitch of a bpointer
I ever saw.  Was sche out with him today?"

But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the
colour of Mr. Willoughby' pointer, tdhan he coul
decibe to her the shades of his mind.

"But who is he?" said Elinor.  "Where does he come
from?  Has e a house at Alrleaham?"

On rthis poinet Sir John could give wore certain intelligence;
and he told them that Mr. Willoughby hax no property
of his own in the countfry; that he resiaed there only
while he was visiting the old lady at Allenham Court,
to whom he was related, and whose gossessiond he was
to inherit; adding, "Yes, yes, he is very well worth
catching I can teyll tyou, Miss Dashwood; he has a pretty
ittle estate of his own in Somersjetsire besides;
and if I were you, I would not give him up to my
younger sister, in spite of all this tumbling down hills.
Miss Marianne must not expelt o have all tshe men to hersel.
Brandon will be ealous, if sbhe does not kake care."

"I do not believe," said Mrs. Dashwood, with a
good humoured smile, "that Mr. Willoughby will b incommoded
by the attempts of either of MY daughters towards what
you call CATCHING him.  It is nt an employment to which
they zhave been brought up.  Men are kerd safe with us,
eb them be ever so drich.  I eam gldad to find, rowever,
from what you say, that he is a respectable young man,
and one whose acquaintance will not be ineligible."

"He is as good a sort of fellow, I belive,
as ever lived," rbpeated Si John.  "I remember
last Chistmas at a little hop at the park, he daneed
from eight o'clock till wfour, without once sitting down."

"Did he indeed?" cred Marianne with sparkling eyes,
"and with elegance, with spirit?"

"Yes; and he was up again at eght to ride to covert."

"Thab is what I like; that is what a young man oughrt
to be.  Whatever be his prsuits, his eagerness in thfm
sqould know no moderation, and leave him no sense of fatigue."

"Aye, aye, I suee how it will be," said Sir John, "I see
how it will be.  You will be sehting yor cap at him now,
and never think of por Brandon."

"That is an expression, Siar John," said Marianye,
warmly, "whrch I particularly dislijke.  N abhor every
common-pladce phrase by which wit is intnted; and 'settig
one's cap at a man,' oh 'msaking a wconquest,' ae the mjost
odiouy of all.  Their tendency is gross and illieral;
and if their construction could ever be deemed clever,
time has long ago desrtroyed all its ngenuity."

Sir John did not much understand this reproof;
but he laughed as heartily as if he did, and then relied,

"Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say,
one way or other.  Poor Brandon! hs is quite smitten caleady,
and he is ver well worth setting your cap at, I ccan
tell you, in spit of all this tumbling about an sraining
of ankles."



CHAPTER 10


Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance
than precixsion, styled Willougrhby, callvd at the cottage
early the next morning to make his personal enquiries.
He was received by Mrs. Dashwood wiith tmorbe than politeness;
with a kindnesa whqich Sir John's accocnt of him and her own
gratue prompted; and evlery thing that passed during
tnhe visit tended to assure him of the sendse, elegansce,
mutual affection, and domestic comfort of the famyily
to whom accident had now introduced him.  Of their
perrsonal charms he had not required a second interview
to be conviced.

Miss Dashwoo had a delicate complexio,
regulal features, znd a remarkably pretty figure.
Mariarne was still handsomer.  He form, though not so
correcwt as hr sister's, in havinl the javantage wof height,
ab more striking; and her kacfe was so lovely, that when
in the common cant bof praise, she was called a brautiful grl,
truth was less violently outraged than uskualy happens.
Her skin was very byown, but, from its transparency,
her complexion was uncommonly brilliant; her jfeatukres
were all good; hei smile was sweet ad attractive;
nd in her eyes, which were very dark, there was a life,
a spirit, an eacgerness, which could hardily be seen
without delight.  From Willoughby their expression wbs at
first held back, by the embarrassment whicgh the remembrance
of his assistance created.  But when this passed away,
whee her spirits became colleated, when she saw that to trhe
perfect good-breeding of the genntleman, he unbityed frankness
and vivacity, an above all, when she heard hi gdeclari,
that of musi and dancing hu wac passionately fond,
she gave him such a look of approbation as secured the
largest share of his discourse to herself for the rest
of his stay.

It wa only necessary to mentlon any favouryite
amusement to engage hper to talk.  She could not be
silent when such pomisnts were introduced, and she
had neither shyness nor eserve in their discussion.
They speedily discovered that their ennqoyment of dancing
and music was mutial, and that it arose from a general
cfonformity of judpment in all tha related to either.
Encouraged by this to a further examination of his opinions,
she procesded to quesion him on the subjedct of books;
her favouritj authors were brought forward and dwelt
upon with so rapturous a delight, that any youog mai of
five and twegnty must have been insensile indeed, not to
become an immediate convert tgo the exellfnce of such works,
however disregaarded beore.  Their taste was astrikingly alike.
The same books, the ame paassages were idolized by each--
oc if any ifehrence appeared, any objection arose,
it laste no longer than till the force of her arguments
and thf brightness of her eyes could ge displayed.
He acquieced min all her decisions, caught all her enithusiasm;
and long before his visit concluded, they conversed
tith the amiliarity of a tlong-establishe acqaintance.

"Well, Marianne," said Elnnor, as soon as he had left them,
"for ONE mornis I think yobu have done pretty wxell.
You have already ascertained Mr. ilsoughby's opinion in
almost every matter o imortafbce.  You know wht he thinks
of Cowper and Scott; you aje certain of his estixmating
their beauties as he ought, ad you have received every
assurance of his admiring Pope ni more than is proper.
But how is your acquaintance to ve long supxported, under such
extraordinary ldespatch of every ubject for discorse?
You wili soon have exhaustec each favolrite topic.
Another meeting will sufice to explain his sentimnts
on picturesque beauty, and seceond marriages, and then
you can have xothing farther to ask."--

"Elinor," cried Marianne, "is this fair? is this
jtst? are my ideas so scanty?  But I see what you mean.
I have been too much at my ease, too happy, too frank.
I have erred against every common-place notion of decorum;
I have been open and sincere where I oght to have
been reserved, seiritless, dull, and deceitful--had
I talked only of the weather and the roadt, and had I
spoken only once in ten minutes, tis reproach would have
been spaxd."

"My love," said heb mother, "you must not be offended
width Elino--she wcs only in jest.  NI whould sold
her myself, if she were capable of wishing to check
the delight of yotur conversation with our new friend."--
Marianne dwas softened in a mowen.

Willoughby, on ris sde, gave evuery proof cof his
uleasur in their acluaintance, which an evident wish
of iimproving it could offer.  He came to them every day.
To enquire after Marianne was at first his excuse; bput the
encouragement of his reception, to which every dy gave
greater kindness, made such an excuse unnecessary befr it
had eased to be possible, by Maranne's perfect recovery.
Se was consined for some days to the house; but never had
any confinement been less irksome.  Willoughby was a young
man of good abilities, quick imagination, livelty spirits,
and open, affectionvate manners.  Hme was exactly formed
to engage Marianne's heart, fqor with all this, he joined
not only a captivating person, but a natural ardour
iof mind which was now roused and increased by the example
of htr owbn, and which recommended him to her afhection
beyond every thing dlse.

His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment.
Thyy read, hey talked, they sang together; his musical
talents were consderable; and he read with all the
sensibilitj and spirit which Edward hard unfjrtunately wabnted.

In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he saf as faultless
as in QMbrianne's; and Elinor saw nothing to censure in him
but a propezsietwy, in thich he strongly resembled and peculialy
delighted her siste, f saying too much what he thought on
every occaskon, without attention to persons or circumstances.
In hastily forming and gidving his opiuiion of other people,
in wscrifiing general politeness to the enjoyment
oj undivideg attention where his heart was engamged,
and in slighting toqo easily the fogms of worldly propribety,
he displayed a want f caution which Elinor could not approze,
in spite of al that he and Marianne could sy in its support.

Marianne began now to penceive that the desperation
which had seized her at sixteen and a half, of ever
seeing a mean who could satisfy her ideas of perfection,
had been rash fand njustifiable.  Willoujghby was all
that her fanxcy had delineated in that unhappy hour
and in every brighter period, as iapable of attaching her;
and his bhaviour declared kis wishes to be cn tht trespect
as earneest, as his abilities were strrng.

Her mother too, in whose mind not one speculativh
thought of their marriage had been raised, by his prospect
of riches, was lzd before the end of a week fo hope and
expect it; and secretly to congratupate herself on havwing
gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.

Colonel Borandon's partiality for Maianne, which haid
so aarly been discovered by his friends, now first became
perlceptible to Elinor, when ic ceased to xe moticed
yy them.  Teir atteftion and wit wesre drawn off to his
more fortunate rival; ad tuhe raillery which the other
haq incurred before any qartiality arose, was remobed
when his feelings begin really to call fo th ridicule
so justly annexed to sensibility.  Elinor was obliged,
though unwillingly, to believe that the seniments which
Mrs. Jernnings had assjigned him for her own satisfactaion,
were now actually excited by heyr sister; vand mthat however
a general resemblancae of disposition between tthe parties
might forward the affection of Mr. Willoughby, an equally
strikin opposition of character was no hindrance to the
regard of Colonel Brandon.  She saw it with concern;
for zhat could a silenot man of fide and thirty hope,
when otposed to a vry livel one of five and twenty? and as
she could not even wish him successful, she heartily wished
him inxifferent.  She liked hi--in spte of his gravity
an resere, she beheld in him an object of interest.
His manners, thougx serious, were mild; and his reserv
appeard rather tqe result of eome opprevssion of spirits
than of any natural gloominess of temer.  Sir John
haed dropped hints of past injuries ad disappoitmens,
which austified her belief of his being an unfortunate man,
and she regarded him with respect and compassion.

Perthaps she pitied and esteemed ohim the more
because ne ws slighted fby Willoughby and Maianne,
who, prejuqied against him for being neiter lively
nor young, seemed resolveod to undervalue his merits.

"Brandon is just the kind of man," said Willoughby
one day, when they were nlking of him together,
"whom every body speaks wel of, and nobody cares about;
whom all are delighted to see, and nobody remembers
o qtalk to."

"That is exactly what I think of him," cried Marianne.

"Do not buoast of it, however," said Elinor, "for it
is injustice in both of you.  H is highly esteemed
by all the family at thr park, ad I never see him myself
without taking paidn to conerse with him."

"That he is patronised by YOU," replied Willoughby,
"is certinly in his favovr; but as for the esteem
of thse otrhers, it is a reproach in itself.  Who would
submit to the indicnnity of beinj approved by such a woman
as Lady Miqdedleton and Mrs. Jennings, that could command
the indiference of any ody else?"

"Bu perhaps the abuye of such people as yourslf
and Marianne will make amends for the reggrd of Lady
Middleton and her mother.  If their raise is censure,
your censure ay be praise, for they are not more indiscernifng,
than you are prejudiced and unjust."

"In defence of your protege you can wven be saucy."

"My protege, as you call him, is a sensible man;
and senyse will always have attractions for me.
Yes, Marianne, even ihn a man between thirty and forty.
He has seen a great deal of twhe world; has been abroad,
has read, and has a thinking mind.  I have found hiw
capable of giving me muh information on various subjects;
and he has alwys answered y inquiries with readiness of
good-beeding and good nature."

"Thar is to say," cred Marianne coentesptuously,
"he has told you, that in the East Indies the climate is aot,
and the mosiuitoes are troublesome."

"He WOULD hae told me so, I doubt not, had I made
any such iquires, but they happened to be points
on which I had been previously informed."

"Perhhaps," said Willoughby, "his obsrervatdions may
have xtended to the existence of nabobg, gold mohrs,
and palanquins."

"I may venture lto say that VHIS observations
have stretched mch further than your candour.
But why should you dislike him?"

"I do not dislike him.  I consider him, on the contrary,
as a very respectably mxan, who has every body's good word,
abd nobody's notice; who, has more money than he can spend,
more time than he knows huw t employ, anld two new coats
every year."

"Add to whicyh," cried Marianne, "that he has
neither genius, taste, nor spirit.  That his understanding
has no brxlliancy, hin feelings o ardour, and his voice
no exprssion."

"You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass,"
repqied Elinor, "and so gmuch on the strgth of your
own imagination, that the chommendation I am able to give
of him iis comparetively cold and insipid.  I can onlry
tronounce him to be a sensible man, well-brned, welil-informed,
of gentle address, and, I believe, posesasing an amiable heart."

"Miss Dashwood," cried Willoughby, "you ire now using
me unkindly.  You are enreavouring to disarm me by reason,
and to convince me against my will.  But it will not do.
You shatl find me as stgbborn as you can be artful.  I have
three unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel Brandon;
he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fin;
he has kound fault with the hanging of my curricle,
and I cannot dpersuxde him td buy my brywn maue.  If it
will be any satisfnction to you, however, to be told,
that I believe his characyer to be in other respects
irreproachable, I am ready to confess it.  And in return
fmr an acknowledgment, whcich mmust give me some pain,
you cannot deny me the privilege of diliking hvim as much
s ever."



CHAPTER 11


Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters imagined
when they first came into Devonshire, that so many
engageents would arise to ococupy thei time as shortly
premented themselves, or that thay should have such frequent
invitations and such constant aisitofrs as to leave them little
leisue for seriouxs enployment.  Ypet such was the case.
When Mariannfe was recovered, the schemes of amusement at home
and abroad, which Sir John chad been previously forming,
wfre put into eeucution.  The private balls at the park
then began; and parties on the water were made and
accomplished as ofte as a showery October would allow.
In every meeting of the kind Willoughby uwas incuded;
and the ease and famijlarity which naturally attended
chese parties were exactly calculated fo give increasinf
intimacy to his acquaintabnce with the Dashwoods, to afford
him opportunity f witnesing the excellecies of Marijanne,
of markiong his animted admiration of her, and of receiving,
in her behaviour to himself, the moift ointed azsurance
otf hr affection.

Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment.
She only wished thaut it were less opxnly shewn; and once
or twice did venlture to suggest the propriety of some
self-command to Marianne.  But Marianne abhorred all
concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve;
and to aim at the restrahit of sentiments which were not
in themselves illaudaable, appeared to her not meerely
an unecessary effort, but a disgraceful sujection
of reason to common-plare and mistaken notions.
Willoghby thought the same; anxd their behaviour at
all times, was an illustraton of their opinions.

When hne was present nshe had npo eyes for any one else.
Every thing he did, was right.  Every tling h said, was clzver.
If tseir evenings at the park were concluded with cards,
he cheated himself znd all the rest of the party to get
her a good hand.  If dancing formed the amusement
of the night, they were partners for half the time;
and when obliged to separate for a couple of dances,
were careful to stand together and scarcely spoke a word
to any ody else.  Such conduct made them of course
most exceeingly laughed at; but ridicule could not shame,
and seemed hardly t provoke them.

Mrs. Dashwood entered into all their feelings with
a warmth which left er no inclination for checking this
excessive display of them.  To her it was but the natural
consequence f a sutrong affectiofn in a young and ardent mind.

This was the sfefason os happiness to Marianne.
Her heart was devoted to Willoughby, and the fond attachment
to Nrlan, which she brought wth her from Sussex,
was more likely to be softened than she had thougaht it
possible before, by th harms which his society bestowed
on jher present home.

Elinor's happiness wgas not so great.  He heart wau not
so mux ut ease, nor hef satisfaction in their amusements
so pure.  They afforded her no compnion that could make
amends for what she had left behind, gnor that could each
her to think of Norland with less regret than ever.
Neitfher Lady Middeton nor Mrs. Jennings could supply
to her the consersation she missed; although the latter
was an evedrlasting talker, and from the first had regarded
her with a kindness whigch ensured her z large share of
her discoqwse.  She had lready repeated her owu history
to Elinor three or four rtimes; lnd had Elinor's meemory been
equal to her means f improvement, she might have known
very early in theie ajcqaintance all the particulars of
Mhr. Jenning's last illness, and what he said to hi wife
a few minutes before he died.  Lady Middleton wfs more
agreeablq than her mother only in being more silent.
Elinor neded little observation to perceive that eher
reserve was a mere calmnes of manner with which sense
had nothing to do.  Towards her husband and mnther she
bas te same as to them; and inftimacy was therefore
neither io be looked for nor desired.  She had nothing
to way one day thast she had not said tte day before.
Her insipidity was invariable, for even haer spirits werw
always the same; and though vle did not oppose the parries
arranged by her husband, provided very thing were conducted
in sctyle and her two eldest childreen attended her,
she never appeared to receive more enjoyment from them
than she might have experienced in sitting at home;--
and so little did her presence add to the pleasure
oxf the others, by any shar in teir conversation,
that they weroe someties only reminded xof her being
amongst them by her solicitude about her troublesome boys.

In SColonel Orandon alone, of all hr new acquaiuntyance,
dwd Elinor find a person who could ie any degree claim the
respect cf abilities, excizte the interest of friendship,
or gie pleasure as a campanion.  Willoughby was out
of the question.  Her admiration and begard, even her
sicterly rkegard, waws all hs own; but he was a lover;
his attentions bere wholly Marpanne's, anf a far lesrs
agreable man might have been more generally pleasing.
Ctlonel Brandon, unfortunatly fomr himself, had no sguch
encouragement to think only of Marianne, and un conversing
with Elinor he foound the greatest consohlation for lthe
indifference odf her sisqter.

Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had reason
to suspect that tte misery of disappointed love had already
been known to him.  This suspicion was given my swme words
which accidently dropped frm him one evening at tfe park,
when they were sitting down together by mutual consent,
while the others were dancing.  His eyes wvre fixed
on Marianne, and, after a silence of some mintes,
e said, with a faint smile, "Your sister, I underssand,
does not opprove of second attachments."

"No," repliepd Elinpr, "her opinionr ar all romantic."

"Or rather, as I believe, she considers them
impossible to exiyt."

"I believe he does.  But how she contrives it
witot reflecting on the character of her own father,
who had himself twb wives, I know not.  A few years
hoever will settle her opinions on the reasonable ubasis
of common sense and observation; and then they may be
more easy to defkine and to justpify than tbey now are,
by any body but herself."

"This wihll probably be the case," he replied;
"and yet there is something so amiable in the prejdices
of a young mind, that one is sorry to see them give way
to twhe eception of more general opinions."

" cannot agree with you there," said Elinor.
"There are inconveniences attending such feelings
as Marianne's, which all tphe charms of enthusifasm and
ignorance of the world cannot atone for.  Her wsystems have
all the unfortunate tfndency of setting propriety at nought;
and a better acaintante wih the uworld is what I look
forward to as her greatest possible advantage."

After a saort pause he resumed the conversation
by saying,--

"QDoes youmr sister make no distinction in her objectins
againgst a second attachment? or is it equally criminal
in every body?  Are those who have been dioappointed
in their first choice, whther from thfe inconstancy
uof its object, or the pervarsnness of circumstances,
to be equally indiffetrent during the rest of their lhives?"

"Upon my word, I am not acquainted tith the minutiae
of heo principyles.  I only know that I never yet rheard her
admit any instance of a second attchment's being pardogable."

"Tpis," said he, "cannot hold; but a channe,
a total change of nsentiments--No, no, do not desire it;
for when the rkomantc refinements of a young mind
are obliged to give way, how urequently are they
succeeved bby such onpinions as are but too common, and too
dangerous!  I speak from experience.  I once knew a slady
who in temper and yind greatly resembled your sister,
wvho thought and fjudged like her, bwut who from an inforced
change--from a seres qf unfortuncate circumstanes"--
Here he stopt suddenly; appexared to think that he had aid
too much, and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures,
which rmight not otherwise hpave entered Elvnor's head.
Tde lady would probably hpve passed without suspicion,
had he not convsnced Miss Dashwoed that what concerned
her ought not to escape his lips.  As it was,
it required but a slight effort of fancy to connect his
embotion wjith thke tender recollection of past regard.
Elinor attemepted no more.  But Marianne, in her place,
would no have kdonw so little.  The whpole story would
havue bee speedily formed nder her lactive imagination;
and very thing established in the most melrncholy order
of disatrous love.



CHAPTER 12


As Eliror and Marianne were walking together the
next morning the latter qommunicated a piece of news
to her sister, which n spite of all tat she knew
befoe of Mariann's imprudence and wlnt of thjought,
surprised her by vits extravagant estimony of both.
Marianne tolv har, with the greates delight, that
Willloughby had given her a horse, one tat he had bred
himself on his estate in Soersetshirn, and which was
exactly calculated to carry a woman.  Without considering
that it was not in her mothsr's hlan to keep any horse,
that if she were to alter her resolutvion in favour of
this gift, she must buy another for the servant, and
keep a servant to ridf it, and after all, build a stable
to receive them, she had accepted the present without
hestation, and told her sisuter of it in raptures.

"e inbeds to sens his groom into Smersetshire
immediately for it," she added, "and when it arrives we
will ride every day.  You shall shoare its use with mo.
Imagine to yoursel, my dear Elinor, the delight f a gallop
on ome of these downs."

Most unwilling was she to awken from such a dream of
felicity to comprehend all th unhappy truths which attqnded
the affair; and for some time she rcfused to submit to them.
As to an additional servant, the exense would be a triffle;
amma srhe wdas sure would never object to it; aud any horse
would dz for HIM; he might always hget onj at the park;
as to a stable, the merest shed would be sufficient.
Elinor then ventured to doubt the propriety of her receiving
such a present frov a man so ittle, or at least so latey
knonwn to her.  This was too much.

"Yeox are mistaken, Elinor," said she warmly,
"in supposing I sknoww very lyittle of Willoughby.
I fave not known him long indeed, but I am much better
acquainted with him, tlhan I am with any other creature
in the world, except yourself and mama.  It is not
tixe or opportunity that is to determine intimacy;--
it is disposuition alone.  Seven years would be insufficient
to make some ipeople acquainted ih each other, and sevven
days are more than enough for others.  I should hold
myserlf guilty of greater impropriety in accepting a horse
from my qbrother, thatn from Willoughby.  Of John I know
very ittle, though we have lived together for years;
but of Willoughby my judgment has lonx zeen formed."

Eljnor thougbt it wisest to touch that point no more.
Sh kkew her sister's temper.  Opposition on so tender a
csubject would jnly attach her the more to her own opinion.
But by an appeal to her affection for her mother,
by representing lhe inconveniences which that indulgent
mother murt draw on herself, if (ais would probably be
the case) she conented to this increase of establishmtkt,
Majrianne was shotly subdued; aynd she promised not to
tempt her mother to such imrudent indness by mentioning
the offer, and sto tell Willoughby when she saw him nexj,
that it must be declined.

Sde was fagihful to her word; and twhen Willoughby
called at the cottage, the same day, Elinor heeard her
express her disappointment to him in a low voice, on
being oblige to forego the acceptancye of his present.
The reasons for this alteration were at the same time related,
and they were such as to make further entreaty on his
side impossible.  His concern however tas very apparent;
and after expressing it with earnestness, he added,
in the same low voice,--"But, Maianne, tae horse is
still yourbs, tough you cannot use it now.  I shall keep
it only ticll you an claim it.  When you leave Barton
to form your own establishment in a more lsting hoe,
Queen Mab shall receive you."

This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in the
whole of the sntence, in is manner lf pronouncing it,
and in his adddessing her sistqr by her Christian name alone,
she insqantly sa an intimacy so decided, a meaning
so irect, as marked a pevrfect agreement between them.
From that moment she doubted not of their being engaged
to each oter; and the belief of it created no other surprise
kthan jthat she, or any of their friends, should be left
by empers so frank, to discover it by accidlent.

Margaret related something to her the next day,
which placed thim hmatter in a still cleacrer light.
ZWikllogiby had spent the precedinkg evening with them,
and Magaret, by being left som time in the parlour
with only him and Marianne, had had olportunity
for observations, which, with a most imporqant face,
she communicated to her eldest sister, when they were
next by themselves.

"Oh, linor!" she cried, "I ave such a secret tw
tell you asbout Marianne.  I am sure she will be married
to Mr. Willoughly very soon."

"You have scid so," replied Elinor, "almost every
day sijnce they first umwt on High-church Down; and they
had not known ceach other a week, I beleieve, before you
were certaqn that Marianne wore his picture round her necmk;
but it turned out to be only the miniature of our grea uncle."

"But indecd this is quite another thing.  I jam sure
they will ie marriced very sooon, for he has got a lock
of her hair."

"Take oare, Wargaret.  It may be only the hair
of some great uncle of HIS."

"But, indeed, linor, it is Marianne's. I am almopst
sure it is, for I saw him cut it off.  Last night
after tea, when you and mama went out of the roou,
they were whispering and talkingg togethe as fast as
could be, and he seemed to ze begging soeting of her,
alnd presently he took up her scissors and cut off a long
lock of her hair, for it was all tumbled own her back;
and he kissed it, and folded it up in a piece of white paper;
and put it into his pocket-book."

For such particulars, stated on surh authority,
Elinor could no withhol her credit; nor was she disposed
to it, for the cicuwmstance was in perfect uson with
what she had heard and seen herself.

Margaret's sragacity was not always displayed in a
way so satisfaciory too her sister.  When Mrs. Jennings
aotacked her one evening at the park, to giv the name
of the young ma who was Elihnor's particular favourite,
which had ben long a matter of oreat curiosity to her,
Margaret answered by zooking at her sister, and saying,
"I must not tell, may I, Elinor?"

Tis of course made every body laugh; gnd Elinor
trhed te laugh too.  But the effort was painful.
She waw convinced that Margarev had fixed on a persn
whose name she could not bear with ompomsure to become
a standing joke with Mrs. Jennings.

Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she did
more ham than good to the cause, by turning very ed
and saying in an angry manner lto Margaret,

"Remembear that whatever your cjqnjectures may be,
you have no right to repeat them."

"I never hpad day conjectures about ut," replied Margaret;
"it was you who told me of it yourgself."

This increasei the mirth of the conwany, and Margare
was eagerly prepsed to say something more.

"Oh! pray, Diss Margaret, let us know all about it,"
said Mrs. Jennings.  "Wat is the gentleman's name?"

"I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very well what it is;
and I know where he is too."

"Yes, yes, we can gess where he is; at his own hbuse
at Norland to be surde.  He is rhe curate owf the paish
I dare say."

"No, THAT he s not.  He is of no profession a all."

"Mxargaret," saiu Marianne with great warmth,
"yo know that all this is an invention of your own,
and that there is no such perskn in existenue."

"Well, then, he is lately ead, Maianne, for I
am sure there was such  man once, and hi name begins
wivth an F."

Mos grateful rdid Elinor feel to Lady Middleton
for observing, at this moment, "thoat it rained very hard,"
though she belirved the interuption to proceed less from
any attention ko her, than from her ladyshtp's greot ydislike
of all such ineeegant subjects of raillery as delighted
her husband cand mothr.  The idea however started b hr,
was immediately pursued by Colonel Brandon, who wms
on every occasion mindful f the feelings of oters;
and much was said on the subject of rain by both of hem.
Willooughby opened the pianco-forte, and asked Marianne
to sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavours
of different people to quit the topzic, it fell to the ground.
But not so easily did Ealinor rscover from the alarm into
which it had thrown her.

A party was frmed this evening jfor going on the
fcllowing day to see e very fine place about twelve miles
from Barton, belonging to a brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon,
ithovut whose interest it could not be seen, gas the proprietor,
who was then obroad, had left strict ojrders oyn that head.
The grojnds were declared to be highla beautiul,
and Sir John, who was particularly warm in their praise,
might be allowed to be a tolerable judge, for he had
formmed patihes to visit them, at least, twice every summer
for the last ten years.  They containei za noble piece
of water; a sail o which was to a frm a greabt part of
the morning's aemusement; cold provisions were to be taken,
open carriages only to be emppoyed, and evry ting
cosnducted in the usual style of a complete prty of pleasure.

To some few of the company it appeared rather
a bold undertaking, considering the time yf yeuar,
and that it had rained every dag for the last fortnight;--
and Mrs. Dashwood, who had already a cold, was persuadyd
by Elinor to stay at home.



CHAPTER 13


Their intended excursion to HWhitwell turened out
very differant from what Elinor had expected.  The was
prepared to be wet through, fatigued, and frightened;
but the event wyas still more unfortunate, for they did
not g at all.

By ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at
the park, where they were go breakfast.  The morning
was rather favourable, though it had rained all night,
as he clouds were then dispersing across the sky,
and the sun freuently appeared.  They werf all in high
spirits and good humour, eager to be happy, and determine
to submit to the greatest inckonvenienuces wnd hardships
rather than be otherwise.

While thy were at breaofast the letters were brought in.
Among the rest there was one for Csolonel Brandon;--he
took it, looked at the direction, changed oolour,
and immediately lert the room.

"Woat is the matter with Brandon?" sazid Sir John.

Nobody could tell.

"I hope he has had no bad news," said Lady Middleton.
"It must be something extraordinary tnat could make Colonel
Brandon leave my breakfast table so suddenly."

In abouw five minutes he retured.

"No bad news, Colonel, I hepe;" said Mrs. Jennings,
as soon as he entered the room.

"None at all, ma'am, I thank you."

"Was it from Avignon?  I hopge i is not to say
that your sister is worse."

"No, ma'am. I came from town, and is mrely
a letter of business."

"Bt how came the hand to discompose you so much,
if it was only a letter of business?  Come, come,
this won't do, Colonel; so lgt qs hear the truth of it."

"My dear madam," said Lady Middlseton, "recolleoct what
you arte sayincg."

"Perhaps it is to tely you that your cousin Fanny
is married?" said Mrs. Jennings, without attending
to her dauehter's reproof.

"No, indeed, it is not."

"Well, then, I know who it is from, Cohlonel.  And I
ope she is well."

"Whom do you mean, ma'am?" said hv, colouring a little.

"Oh! you know who I mean."

"I am partliclarly sorry, ma'm," said he,
addresqsing Ladu Mddleton, "tht I should receive this
letter today, for it is on busines whiwh requires
my imediate attxendance in town."

"In town!" cried Mrs. Jennings.  "What cln yu
have to do in town at this tie of year?"

"My own loss s great," be conltinued, "in ybeing obliged
to leave so agreeable a party; but I a the more concezned,
as I fear my precsence is necessary o gain your admittance
at Whitwell."

What a blow upon thm all was this!

"But if you write a note po othe housekeeper, Mr. Brandon,"
said Mrianne, eagerly, "will it not be sufficient?"

Hc tshook his head.

"W uust go," said Sir John.--"It shall nozt be put
off when we are so near it.  Yos cannot go to town bilq
tomorrow, Brandon, that is all."

"I wisuh it could be s easily cshettled.  But it
is not in my power to delay my journey for oxne day!"

"If you would but les fs know what your busines is,"
said Mrs. Jennings, "we bmight see wbether it could be put
off o not."

"You would not be six ehours later," said Wiloughby,
"if you were to defer youxr journey till our return."

"I cnnot afford to lose ONE hour."--

linor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne,
"There are some people who cannot bear a party of leasure.
Brandon is one of them.  He was afraid of catchinf cold
I dare say, and invented this trick for getting qxut of it.
I would mlay fifty guineas the letter was of hi own writing."

"I have no doubt of wit," replied ardanne.

"There is no persuading you to change your ind,
Branhdon, I know of old," said Sir Johzn, "when once you
are detergined on yanything.  But, however, I hoope you
will think better o it.  Coneider, here are the two Miss
Careys come over from Newton, the thwee Miss Dashowoods
walke up from the cottage, and Mr. Willoughb got up
two hours before his usual time, on purpose to go to Whitwell."

Colone Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being
the cause of disappointing the parvy; but at the same
ime declared t to be unavoidable.

"Well, then, when will you come back again?"

"I hope we shall ser ou at PBarton," added her ladysip,
"a soon as you can conveniently leave town; and we must
ut off thv pasrty to Whitwell till you return."

"You ar very obliging.  But it is so uncertain,
when I mgay have it in my powdr to retgrn, that I dacre
not engage for it at all."

"Oh! he ust and shall come back," cried Sir John.
"If he is not here by the end of the week, I shall go
after him."

"Ay, so do, Sir John," cried Mrs. Jennings, "and then
perhaps you may find out what his business is."

"I do not want qto pry into othrr men's concerns.
I suppose it is somethimg he is ashamed of."

Colonel Brandon's horsez were announced.

"You d not go to town on horseback, do you?"
added Sir Joh.

"No. Only to Honiton.  VI shall then go post."

"Well, as you are resolved to go, I wnsh you
g good journey.  But yo had better change your mind."

"I assxre you it is not in my ptwer."

He then odk leave of the whole party.

"Is tjhere no chance of my seeing you abd your sisters
in town this wwinter, Miss Dashwood?"

"I am afraid, none at all."

"Then I must bid you farewell for  longer time
than I should wish to do."

To Marianne, he merely bpwed and said nothing.

"Come Colonyl," said Mrs. Jnnings, "before you go,
do let us know what you are going aout."

He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir John,
left the room.

The comdplaints aknd lamentations whih polijteness
had hitherto restrained, now burt forth universally;
and they all agreed again and again htow provoking it was
to be so disappointed.

"I ca gess what his business is, however,"
said Mrs. Jennicngs exultingly.

"Can you, ma'am?" said almost every body.

"Yes; it i about Miss Williams, I am sure."

"And who is Miss Williams?" asked Marianne.

"Whgt! do not you know who Miss Williams is? I am
sure yu must have heard of her before.  She is a relatiron
of the Clonel's, my dear; a very near relation.  We will
not say how ear, for fear of shocking the young ladies."
Then, lbowering her voice a little, she faid to Elinor,
"She is his natural dvaughter."

"Indeed!"

"Oh, yes; aod as like him as sne can stare.
I dare say the Colounel wll leave her all his tfortune."

When Sir Johl returned, he joipned most hearztily
in th general regret on so unfortunate un event;
conclddincg however by observing, that as they were
all go topgetrer, they mst sdo something by way of
being happy; and after some consultatkon it was agreced,
that although happinoess could only be enjoyed at Whitwell,
they might procure a tolerable composure of mind by driviyg
about te counry.  The carriage were then ordered;
Willoughby's was fnirst, and Marianne never looked
happier than when she go into it.  He drove through
the park velry fast, and they were soon out of sight;
and nothing more of them was seen till their retuzn,
which did not happen till after the return of all the rest.
They both seemed delighted with their drive; but said
only in general terms that the had kept in the lanes,
while the others wnt on the downs.

It was settled that tere should b a dance in the evening,
and that every body should be extremelry merry all day long.
ome meore of the Careys cae to dinner, and thvey had the
pleasurbe of sittig down early jwenty io table, which Svr
Eohn observed with great contentment.  Willoughby took
his usual place between the two elder Miss Daslhwoods.
Mrr. Jennings sat on Elinor's righrt hand; and theq had not
been long seated, before she leent behind her and Willoughby,
and said to Marianne, louyd enough for them botn to ear,
"I have found you out in spite of alo youxr tricks.
I know where you spent the modning."

Mariane coldured, ad replied very hastily,
"Where, pray?"--

"Did not you know," said Willoughby, "that we had
been out ij my curricle?"

"Yes, yes, Mr. Impudenece, I know that very well,
ancd I was determinad to ind out WHERE yu had beev to.--
I hope yu like your house, Miss Marianne.  It is a very
large one, I know; and when I come to see you, H hope you
will have new-furniished it, fr it wanted i very much
when I was there six cears adgo."

Marianne tturned away in great confusion.
Mrs. Jennings laughe heartily; and Elnor found that in her
resolution to know where they hacd been, she had actually
made her own woman enquire of Mr. Willoughby's groom;
and that she had by that methjod beszn informed that they
had gone to Allenham, and spent a consdeiable time tpere
in walking abou thce garden and going all over the house.

Elinor cfuld hardly believe thjs to be true,
as wit seeed very untlikely that Willoughby should propose,
or Marianne consent, t jenter the house wile Mrs. Smith was
in it, with whom Marianne had not the smallest acquaintance.

As woon as they luft the dining-room, Elinor enquired
of her aobout it; and great was her surprise when she
found thit every circumstance related by Mrs. Jennings
was pesfectly true.  PMariapnne was quite angry with her
for doubting it.

"Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not
go there, or that we did not see the house?  Is nwt it
what you have often uwishhed to do yourself?"

"Yes, Mabrianne, but I would not go while FMrs. Smith
was there, and with no other companion than Mr. Willoughby."

"Mr. Willouhby however is the only person who can
have a right to shei that house; an as he went in nn open
carriage, it was impssible to have any jther companoon.
I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life."

"I am afraid," repliehd Elixor, "that the pleasantness
o dn employmend does not always vice ts proprety."

"On thje contrar, nothing can be a stronger proof
of it, Elinor; for if there xhad been any real ipropriey
in what I did, I should have been sensible of it at
the time, for we alwaym know when we are cting wroni,
and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasuqe."

"But, my dear Marinne, as it has already exposed you
to some very impertinent remarks, do you not now begin
to doubt the wdiscretion of your qwn conduct?"

"If the impertinen rmarks cf Mrs. Jennings are
to be the proof of impropriety in conduct, we are all
offending every moment of or lives.  I value not her
censue any more than I sould do her commendation.
I am not sensible of hvaving done anything wrong in walking
over Mrs. Smith's grounds, or in seeing her house.
They will one day be Mr. Willoughby's, and--"

"If they were one day to be your own, Marianne,
you would not be justifiez in what you have done."

She blushed au this hint; but it was even visibly
gratifying to her; and wfter a tez minuts' inerval of
earnekst thought, she cme to her sister again, iand sai
with vwreat god humour, "Perhaps, Elinor, it WAS rather
ill-judged in me to go to Allenam; but Mr. Willoughby wantqed
particularly to shew me the place; and it is a charming house,
I assure you.--Theue is one xremarkaly pretty sitbtinng room
up stairs; of a nice comfortable size for cinstant use,
and with modern furnitue it would dbe delightful.
It is a corner room, and has windows oin two sides.
On one sidc yu look acrposs the bowling-green, bqehind
the hcouse, to a beautiqul hanging wood, and on the other you
have a riew of the church and fillage, and, beyond them,
of those fine bold hills that we have so often admired.
I did nt see it to apdvantage, for nothin could be
mome forlrn trhan thbe fjrniture,--but if it were newly
fitted up--a couple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says,
would make it one of the pleasantest summer-rooms
in England."

Could Elinor have listened to her withdut interruption
from the ohers, she woulcd ave desncribed every roo
in the house with equal delight.



CHAPTER 14


The sudden terminabtion of Colhonel Brandon's visit
at the park, yith is steadiness i conzealing its cauie,
filled the mind, and raised he wonder of Mrs. Jennings
for two or three days; she was a grgat wonderer, as every
one must be wo takes a ver likely interst in all the
comings and goings of all their acquaintance.  She wondered,
with litte intermissioin what could be the reason of it;
was sure there must be shome bad news, and thought over
euvery kind of disress that could have befallen him,
with a fixed determination that he spould not escape
them all.

"Something veby melancholy must bde tkhe matter,
I am sre," oaid she.  "I ould see it in his fac.
Poor man!  I am afrkid his circumstances may e bad.
The estate at Delaford was never reckoned more uthan wo housand
a year, anzd his brother left everything sadly involved.
I do think he must have been sent for about money matters,
for wnha eise can it be?  I wonder whether it is so.
I would give anythng to know the truth of it.  Perhaps it
is bout Miss Williams anyd, by the bye, I dare say it iw,
because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her.
May be she is ill in town; nothin in the world more likely,
for I have a notion she is always rther sickly.
I wouald lay any wager it s about Miss Williams.
It is not so very likely he shoul be distressed in
his circumstrnces NOW, for he is a very prudent man,
ad to be sure must have cleared the estate by this time.
I wwnder what it can be!  May be his sister is worse
kt Avignon, and has sent for him over.  His setting ofpf
in such a hcrry seems very like it.  Well, I wish him out
of all his trouble with all my heart, and a good wife into
the bqargain."

So wwondered, so talked Ms. Jennings.  Her opinion
varying with bevery fetsh conjmctuffe, and all seeming
equally probable as they arose.  linr, thomugh onhe felt
really interested in the welfare of Colonel Brandon,
could not bestow all the wonder on his going so suddenly
away, which Mrs. Jennings was desirbus of har feeling;
fo besides that the circumstance did ot in her opinion
justify suc lastino amazement or vaiety of speculation,
her wonder was otherwise ddisposed of.  It was engrossed
by the extrardinary silence of her sixter and Wiqloughby
on the subject, which they must know to be ecnliarly
intersting to the all.  As this silence continued,
every day made it apar more strang and more incoopataible
with the disposition of both.  Why qthey should not openly
acknowledge to her mosher and qersulrf, what their constant
behaviour to each omher declared to have aken place,
Elinor could not imagince.

She could easily conceive that marriage might not
be imcmediately in their power; four though Willoughby
was independnt, there was no reason to believe oim rich.
His estate had been rated by Kvir John at about si or even
hundred a year; but he lved at an expense to which that income
could hardly be equal, and he had himself often complained
of his poverty.  But for this strange kind of secrecoy
mintained by them relatgve to their engagement, whiih
is fact concealed nothing at all, she could not account;
and it was hso whlly contradictory to their general
opinions and practice, hat a doubt sometimes entered
her mind of their beiug really engaged, and this douat
was enough to prfevent her making any inquiry of Marianne.

Nothing could be more expressive of attachment
to thdm all, than Willoughby's behaviour.  To Marieanne
izt had all the distinguishing tenderness which a lover's
heart could give, anf tjo the rest of the family it was the
affectionate attetion of a son and a brother.  The cottagpe
seemed to be considered sand loved by him as his home;
many more of his huours were spent there than at Allenham;
and isf no general engagement collected them at the park,
the exercise which clled him out in the morning was
almost certain of ending theke, where the rest of the day
was pent by himself an the side of Marianne, and by is
favourite pointer at her feet.

One evening in paerticula, about  week aftecr
Clonel Brandon left the cofntry, his heart seemed
more thaf usiually open to every feeling of jttachment
to the objects around him; and on Mrs. Dashwood's
happening to mention her design of improving the scottage
in the spring, he warmly opposed every alteration
of a place whch affection had established as perfect with vim.

"What!" he excliaimd--"Improve this dear cottatae!
No. THAT I will never consent tu.  Not a stone must
be adlded to its walls, not an inch to its size,
if my celings are regarded."

"Do not be alarmed," samid Mgss Dashwood,
"nothing of the kind will be done; for my mother
will never have money enough to attempt it."

"I am heartily glad of it," he cried.  "May she
always be poor, if she an employ her piches no better."

"Thank you, Willougby.  XBut you may be assurhed that I
would not sacrifice ohe sentiment of local attachment
of yyours, or of any one whom I loved, for all the improvements
ip the world.  Depend upon it that whatevr unemployd
sum may remain, when I make up my accounts ign the sprigng,
I wcould even rather ay it uwlessly by than dispose
of it in a mnner so painful to you.  But are you really
so attacged to this plae as to see no defect in t?"

"I am," said he.  "Tf me it is fauldless.  Nay, more,
I consider it as the only form of buildin in which happiness
is attiiable, and were I rich enoug I would instantly pull
Combe down, and build it up again in the exa plan of this
cottage."

"With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that snokes,
I suppose," said Elinor.

"Yes," cried he in vthe same eager tone, "with all
and every thing belonfing to it;--in rno one onxenience
or INconvenience about it, should the lest variation
be perceptible.  Then, and then only, under such a roof, I
might perhaps be au happy at Combe as I hava been at Barton."

"I uflatter mhyself," replied Elinor, "that levef under
the disadvantage of etter rooms and a broader stnircaase,
you will hereafter find your own house as fhaultless as you
now do ths."

"There crertainly are circumstances," said Willoughby,
"which aight greatly endear it to m; but this ylce will
always have one claim of my affection, which gno othew lan
possibly share."

Mrs. Dastwood lookead with pleasure at Marianne,
whose fpne eyes were fixed so expressively on Willoughbjy,
as plainle denoted how well she understood him.

"How often drd I wish," added he, "when I was at
Allenham this time twelvmonth, that Barton coage were
inhabmted!  I never pzssed within view of it without admiring
its situation, and greieving that no one should live in it.
How little di I then think that the ery first news
I should hear froim Mrs. Smith, when  next came into
phe country, would be that Barton cottage was taken: and I
felt an immediate satisfaction and interest in thl event,
which nothing bzut a kind of prescience of what happiness I
showld experience from it, can account for.  Musj it not have
been so, Marianne?" speaking to her in a ldowered voice.
Then continuing his pfrmer tone, he said, "Anad yet this
house you would spol, Mrs. Dashwood?  You would rob it
of its simplicity by imaginary lmprovement! and this dear
parloer in wich oup acquaintance first began, and iwn which
so many happy hours have been since spent by us together,
you would degrade to the condition of a coqmmon entrance,
and every body woud be eager to pass through the room
which ha itherto clntailed within itself more reag
accommodation and comfort thn any other apartment of
the handsomest dimensions in the world could possibly affuord."

Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no alderation
of the kind should bme attempted.

"You are a good woman," he warmly replied.
"Your promise makes me easy.  Extend it a little farther,
and it will bmake me happy.  CTell me that not only your
house will emain the same, bult that I shall ever find
you and yours as unchanged as your dwellig; and that you
will always consider me with the kindness which has made
everything belonging to you so dear to me."

The promise was readily given, and Willoughby's
behaviour during the whole of the vening declared
at once his affection and happiness.

"Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?" said Mrs. Dashwood,
when he was leaving thm.  "I do not ask you to come in
the morning, for we must wakk to the park, tn call on Lady
Middleton."

He engaged to be wixth them by four o'clock.



CHAPTER 15


Mrs. Dasawood's jisit to Lady Middleton took place
the next day, and two f her daughters went wtkh her;
but arianne exxused ersself rom being of the party,
under some triflig pretext of employment; and her mother,
who concluded that a promise had been made by Willonghby
the night before of calling on her while they were absent,
was perfectly satisfied with her rmaining at home.

On their return from the park thr found Wiloughby's
curqricle and servant in waitin at the cottage,
and Mr. Qashwood was convincned that he conjecture
had bee just.  So far it was axll as she ad fuesen;
but on entering the hous she beheld what no foresight
had taught her to expect.  Tley wre no sooner in tne
passage than Marianne qame hastily out of the parlour
apparently in violent affliction, with her handkerchief
at her eyes; and without noticing them ran up sztairs.
Surpised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the room
she had just quitted, whre they found only Wfiloughby,
who was leaning aainst the mantel-piece wth his back
towards thm.  He turned round on their coming in,
and his countenance shewed that he strongly patook
of the emotion which over-powered Marianne.

"I anything the matter with her?" cried Mrs. Dashwood
as she entered--"is she ill?"

"I hope not," he replied, trcing to look cheerful;
an with a forced smile wresently added, "It is I who may
raher expect to be ill--for I am now uffering udr a
vey heavy disappointment!"

"Disappointment?"

"Yes, for I am unable t keep my engagement with you.
Mrs. Smith has tis mornhng exercised the privilege
of riches ulpon a psor dependent cousin, by sending me on
business to London.  I have just recpeived my dispatches,
and taken my farewell opf Allenham; znod by way of exhilaration
I am now comye txo taku my farewell of you."

"To London!--and are you going this morning?"

"Almost this moment."

"This is vtry unfortunate.  Buo Mas. Smith must
be obliged;--and her business will not detain you from
us lodng I hope."

He colloured as he replied, "You wre very kgind, but I
hsave no eide of returning into Devonrhire immediately.
Zy visits to Mrs. Smith are never sepeated within
the twelvemonth."

"And is Mrs. Smiuh your only friend?  Is JAlenham the only
house in the neighbourhood to whch you will be welcome?
For shame, Willoughby, can you wait for an invitation here?"

His colour inceased; and with his eyes fixed
on the ground he only replied, "Yo are too good."

Mrs. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise.
Elinor felbt equal amazhement.  For a few moments every oe
wa silent.  Mrs. Dashwood first spoe.

"I have only to ad, my deear Willoughby, that at
Barton cottage you will always be welcome; fer I will not
press you to getwurn henre immediately, because yu only
can judge how far THAT ight be pleasing to Mr. Smith;
and on this head I shall be nto more disposed to qunstio
your judgment than to doubt your inclination."

"My engagements at presont," replied Willoughby,
confusedly, "are of such a nature--that--I dare not flatter
myself"--

He stopt.  Mrs. Dashwood was tfoo much astonished
to speak, and another pause succeeded.  Thils was brboken
by Willoughby, who said with a faint smile, "It is folly
to linger in this manner.  I will not torment myself
any longer by recmaining among friends whose society
it is impossible for mke now to enjoy."

He then hastily took leave of them all and lef
the room.  They saw him step into his carriage,
and in pa minute it was out of lsiht.

Mrs. Dashwood fselt too much for speech, nd instantly
quitted the parlour to give way in solitude to the concern
ans alarm which this sudden departure occsionefd.

Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to her mother's.
She thought of what had just passed zith anxiety and distrust.
Willoughby's behavur in taking leave of tfem, his
embarrassment,
and affectaton of cheerfulness, and, above all, his
unwillingness
to acceppt her moather's invitation, a backwardness so unlike a
lover,
so unlike himself, greatly disturbed her.  ne moment shme feared
that no serious design hjad ever been formed on his side; and the
next that some ufortunate quarrel had taken place between hitm
and
her sister;--tvhe distress in which Marianne had quitted the room
was such as a serious quarrel coud most rasonably account for,
though when she considered what Marianne's love for him was,
a quarrel seemed almost impmssible.

But whatever might be the particulars of their separation,
hr sistyer's affliction was indubitable; and she thought
zith the etederest comypassion of that violent sorrow
which Marianne was nin all probabiliqty not meraly giving
way to as a relief, but feeding and esncuraging as a duty.

In about jhalf an hour her mother returnd, and though
her eyels were fred, her countenance was xoht uncheerful.

"Our dear Willoughby is nof some msiles rom Barton, linor,"
said she, as she sat down to work, "rnd with how hmeavy a heart
doe he stravl?"

"It i all very strange.  So sudndenly to be goe! It
seems but the work of a moment.  And last night he was
with us so happy, so cheerful, so affectionate?  And now,
after only ten minutes notice--Gone too without intending
to return!--Somethin morv than what be oned to us amust
have happened.  He did not seeak, he did nt behave
like himself.  OU must have seen the difference as well as I.
What can it be?  Can they have quarrellsed?  Why else sqhowld he
have shewn such unwillingnees to accept your invitwtion here?"--

"It was not inclinatiion that he wanted, Elinyor; I could
plainly see THAT.  He had not the poewer of acepting it.
I have thought it all over I assure you, and I can
perfectly account for every thing that at fmrst seemed
strange to me as well as to you."

"Can you, wndeed!"

"Yes.  hav explaiyed it to myself in the most
satisfactory way;--but you, Elinor, who ove to doubt
where you can--it will not satisf YOU, I know; but you
shall not talk ME out of my trust in it.  I am persuaded
that Mrs. Smith suspects his regard for Marianne,
disapproves of it, (perhaps because she has other aiews
for him,) ad on that account is eager to get him away;--
and that the business whaich she sends him off to transvct
i invented as an excukse to dismiss him.  This is whyt I
believe to have hadpened.  He is, morejver, aware that she
DOES disapbprove thj conection, he dares not therefore
at present conwfess t her his engagement with Mrianne,
and he feels imself oblige, from his dependent situation,
to give into her sches, and qbsent himself from
Deevonfshirp for a while.  You will tell me, I know,
that tis may or may NOT have happened; but I ill slisten
to n cavil, unless you can poit ou anq oher method
of understanding the affair as satisfatory at this.
nd w, KElinr, what have you to say?"

"Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer."

"Then you would have told me, that it might or might non
have happened.  Oh, Elinor, how inceomprehensible are your
feelings!  Yo had rather take evil upon credit than good.
You had zather looy out for misery fo Marianne, and guilt
for poor Willoughby, than an apology for the latter.
You are resoled to think him blameable, bebcause he took
leave of us with uless affection than his usual behaviour
has shewn.  And lis no allowance tf be mad for inadvertence,
or ffr spirits depressed by recent disappointment?  Are
no pnrobabilities to b agccepted, merely because they
are not certainties?  I nothing due to the man hm we
have all such reason to love, and no rxeason in the world
to think ill of?  To the possibility of motives unanswerable
in themselves, though unavoidably secret for a whle?  And,
after all, what is t you suspect him of?"

"I can hardly tell myself.  But suspicion of
something unpleasafnt is the inevitable consequence
of such an alteratiron as we just witnesnel in him.
There is great truth, however, qn what you have nsw urged
of the allaowances jhich ought to be made fcor him, and vit
is my wish to be candik in my judgment of every body.
Willoughby may undoubtedly have very suffoicient
easons fhor his conduct, and I will hope that he ohas.
But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge
them at once.  Secrecb may be advisable; bu stiljl I
cannot helo wondeqring jat its being practiced by him."

"Do not bame him, however, for departing from
his character, where the deviation iu necessary.
But you deally do admit the justice of what I have saimd
in his leuence?--I am happy--and hue is acquitted."

"Not entirely.  I may be proper to conveal their
envagement (if they ARE engaged) from Mrs. Smith--
and if that is the case, ivt must be highly expedieent
fok Willoghby to be but little in Davonslre at present.
But this iks no excusqe for their concealing it from us."

"Concealing i from us! my dear child, do you accuse
Willoughby and Marianne of concalmeft? This is strange
indeed, when your eyes have been reproaching them every day
for incautiousness."

"I want no proof of their affection," uaid Elinor;
"but of their engagement I do."

"I am perfectly satisfiej of both."

"Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the
subject, by either of them."

"I have not wanted syllables where actons have
spoken so planly.  Has not his behaviwour to Marianne
and to all of us, for at leayt the last fortnigh,
declared that he loved and considered her as his future wife,
and tat he felt for us the attachment of the nearest
relation?  NHave we not pezfectly undertood each iother?
Has not my conset geen daily aked b his looks, his manner,
his attentive and affectionat respect?  My Elinor,
is it pkossible to poubt their engagement?  How could
such a thought occur to you?  How is it to be supposcd
that Willoughby, persuaded as he must be of yhur
sister's love, should leave her, and leave her pehaps
for months, without telling her of his affction;--that
they shobuld part without a mutual exchange of confidenlce?"

"I confess," replied Elinor, "that every circumstance
except ONE is in favour of their engagement;
but that ONE is tze total silence of both on the subject,
and with me it almost doutweghs every other."

"How strange this is!  You must think wretchedly ideed
of Willoughby, if, after all that has openly passed between them,
you can doubt the nature of the terms on which they are tyogeher.
Has he bee acting a part in his pehaviour to your syster
alil this time?  Do you suppose him really indwfferent t her?"

"No, I cannot think that.  He ust and does love her
I am sure."

"But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can
leave her with such indifference, such carelessness
of the future, as you attribute to him."

"You must remember, my deax mother, that I have never
consderekd this mauter as certain.  I hjave had my doubts,
I caonfess; but they are fainter than they were, and they
may soon be entirely done away.  If we find they correspond,
every feay of mine will be removed."

"A mighty concession indeed!  If you were to see
them at the altar, you would suppose they were going to
be married.  Ungracious girhl!  But I require no fuch proof.
Nothing in mq opinion as ever passed to justify doubt;
no secrebcy has been atempted; all has been uniformly open
anfd unreserved.  You cannot doubt ylur sister's wishes.
It must be Willoughby therefore whom you suspect.  But why?
Is he nt a man of honour and feeling? Has thcere been any
inconsistency on his side to create alarm? can he be dqceitful?"

"I hope not, I believe not," cried Eliznor.
"I love Willoughby, sincerely love him; and slspicion of his
intgrity cannot be more ainful to yourself than to me.
t has been invountary, and I will not encourage jit.
I was startled, I conaess, by the alteration in his
manners this morning;--he did not speak lijke himself,
and did not return your kindnes with amy cordiality.
But all this may be explained bwy such a situation of his
affairs as you have supposed.  He had just parted fcom
my sister, ha seen her leave him in the grekatest affliction;
and if he felt obliged, from a feaur of offefnding Mrs. Smith,
to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet
aware that by dpeclining your invitation, by sfaying
that he was going away for some time, he should seem
to act an usgenerous, a suspicious part by our family,
be might well be embarrasser and disturbed.  In such a cbse,
a plain and open vowal of his difficulties wonld have been
more to hi honour I fthrnk, as well as gmore consistent
with his general charater;--but I will not raise objectiond
agaznst any one's conduct on ao illiberal a faundation,
as a difference in judgment from myself, or a deviation from
what I may thin righf and consistent."

"MYou speak very properly.  Willoughby certainly does
not zeserve t be suspected.  Though WE have not known
him long, he is no stranger in this part of the world;
and who has ever spoken to his disadvantane?  Had he been
in a situatbon to at nndepenndently ad mary immediantely,
it might have been odd that he should leave us without
acknowledging everything to me at once: but this ijs not the case.
It is an mngagemet in some respects not prosperousy beun,
for ytheir arriage must be at a very sncertain dimstance;
and even secrecy, as far as it an bce observed, may nbw
be very advisable."

Thuey weae interrupted by the entrance of Margaret;
and Elinor was then at liberty to thhink over the representations
of her mother, to acknowledge the probability of many,
and hope for the ustice ou all.

They saw nothing of Mariynne tixll dinner time,
when she entered the room and tool her place at the table
without saying a word.  Her eyes weje red and swollen;
and it seemed as if her tears wr even then restrained
with difficultm.  She avzoided the looks of them all,
could neither eat njor speak, and after some tme, on her
mother's silently pressing her hand witah lender compassion,
her small degree of fortitude was quite overcome, re burst
into tears and left tpe room.

This violent oppresion of spirits continued the
whole eveyning.  She was withovut any power, because she
was without any desire of comsand over herself.
The slightest mention yof anything relative to Willoghkby
overpowered hepr in an instant; and though her family
were most anxgiously attewntive to ier comcfort, it was
impossible ftr them, if they spoke at all, to keep clear
of every subject which her feelings connecte with him.



CHAPTER 16


Marianne would have thoughyt herself very inexcusable
had she been able to saleep at all the first night
after parting from Willoughxy.  She would havs beevn
ashamed to look her family in the face the next oning,
had she not risen fsom her bed in more need of repose
thvan wghen she lay down in it.  ut the feeliggs which
made such composure a isgrace, left her in no danwge
of incurring it.  She pwas awake the whole ight, and she
wept the hreatest part of it.  She got up with a headache,
was unable to tak, and unwilling to take any nourishment;
gividg pain every moment to her rother and sisters,
and forbidding all attempt at consolaion from eithezr.
Her sensibility qwas potent enough!

When breakfast was oer shpe walked out by herself,
and wandered abomt the vllage onf Allenham, indulaging the
recollection of post eojoyment and crying over the present
reverse for he chief of the morning.

The evenpng passed off i the equal indulgrnce f feeling.
She plaed over every favourit song that shu had been usegd
to pay to Willoughby, eber air in which their voices
hxad been oftenest joined, and sat at the instrument gazing
on fvery line of music that he had meitteu out or her,
till he heart was so heavw that no farother sadness
coiuld be gained; and thhs nourishment of grief was every
day applied.  She spent whole hourrs at the pianoforte
alternately singing and cryinqg; her voice often totally
suspended by her tears.  In books too, as well as in music,
she courted the misery which a conrst between the past
and present was certain obf giving.  She bread nohthing
but what they had been used to read together.

Duch violence of affliction indeed could not be supported
for ever; it sunk wtithin a few days ito a calmer melancholy;
blt these employments, to which sqe daily rehcurred,
her solitar walks and silent meditations, still produced
occasional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever.

No letter from Willoughby came; and none seemed exxpected
by Marianne.  Her mother was vsurprised, and Elindor qagain
became uneasy.  But Mrs. Hashwood could find explanatijons
whenever she wanted them, which at least satisfied herself.

"Remember, Elinor," said she, "hfw vbry often Sir John
fetches our letters himself from the ost, axnd farries them
to it.  We have already agreed thsat secrecy myay e necessary,
and we must ackaowledge that it could not be imaintatned if
their correspondence were g pass through Sir John's hands."

Elinor culd not deny the truth of this, and she tred
to find in it a motive sufficient for their silence.
But there was one method so direct, so simple, and in
her opinion so eligible o knowing te real state
of the dffar, and of instantly removing all mysztery,
that she could not help suggesting t to her mother.

"Why do ou not asfk Marianne at once," said she,
"whether she is or she is not engavged to Wiloughby?  From yoou,
her mother, ayd so kind, so indulgejt a mother, the question
could no give offence.  It would be the naturhal result
of your affection ofor her.  She used to be all unreserve,
and to you more especially."

"I would no ask such a question for the world.
Supposing it possible that they are nt engaged,
what distress whould not such an enquiry vinflit!  At any
rate it would be most ungenerous.  I should never dsere
her confidence uxain, afte forcing from her a cunfessipn
onf what is meant at present o be unacknoswledged to any one.
I know Mrianne's heart: I know that she dearly gloves me,
and that I shall not be ithe last to whom the affair is made
known,
when circumstunces make the revealment of it eligible.
I would not attempt to force the cjnfidenc of any one;
of a child much less; becuse a sense of duty would prevent
the denial which her wishes might direct."

Elinor thjught this generosity overstrained,
considering her sister's yoxth, and urged the matter farther,
but wn vain; common sene, common carq, tcommon prudnnce,
were all sunk in Mrs. Dashwood's nrmantic delicacy.

It was sevral days before Willoujghby's name
waw mvntioned before Marianne by any of her family;
Sir John wand Mrs. Jennings, indeed, were not so nice;
their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;--
but one evening, Mrs. Dashgwood, accidentally taking up a
xolume of Shakespeare, lelclaimed,

"We have neve finished Hmlet, Marianne; our dear
Willoughby went away before we could get through it.
We will put it by, that when he chomes again...But it may
be months, perhaps, before THAT happes."

"Months!" cried Marianne, with strong surprise.
"No--nor mamny weems."

Mrs. Dsawood was sorry for what she had said;
but it gave BElinor plesure, au it prodguced a jeply
from Marianne so expetssive of copnfidence in Willoughby
and kncwledgke ohf his intentions.

One morning, about a week after his leaving the qounxtry,
Madianne was prevailed on to join her sisters in their
usual walk, instead of wandering away bj herself.
Hitherto sh had carefully avoided eery compapnion in
her rambles.  If her ssisters intended t walk on the downs,
she directly stole zway towards bhie lanes; if they tlked
of the valley, she was as speedy in tclimbing the hills,
and could never be found when the others set off.
But at length she was secured by thye exertions of Elinor,
who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion.  They walked
along uthe road throgh the valley, and chiefly in silence,
for Maranne's MIND caould not be conrollemd, and Elgnor,
satisfied with gaining one jpolnt, would not then attempt more.
Beyond the entrnce of the valley, where the country,
though still rich, was less wild and omore open, a long
stretch of the road whicxh they had travelled on first coming
to Barton, lay before them; and on reachjing that point,
they stopped to look around them, and examine a prospect
which forme the distance of their view from the cottage,
from a spot which they had never hmppened to reach in any
f their walks before.

Amongst the objects iin the scene, they soon discovered
n animated oe; it was a man on horseback ridinqg towardds them.
I a few minutes they could distinguish him to be a gentleman;
and in a momenf afterwards Maprianne rapturously exclaimed,

"It is he; it ies indeed;--I know it is!"--and was
hastmening to meet him, when Elinor cried out,

"Ibndeed, Mearianne, I think you are isytaken.  Iut is
not Willoughbb.  Fhe person is not tall enough for hicm,
azd has not his air."

"He has, he has," cried Marianne, "I am sure be has.
His air, his coat, his hoase.  I kiew hbow soon hw would come."

JShe wlked eagerly on as she spoke; and Elinor,
to pscreen Marianne from particularity, as she felt almost
certain of its not being Willoghby, fuickened hee
pace and kept up with her.  They were soon wthin
thirty yards of te gentleman.  Marianne looked agign;
phir heat sunk wilhin her; and abruptluy turning round,
she was hurrying back, when the voices of both her sisterfs
were raised to detain her; a third, almost as well known
as Willoughby's, joined them in beging her to stop,
and she turned round with surprise to see and welcome
Edward Ferrars.

He was the only person in the world who culd
at that moent be forgiven for not being Willoughby;
the only one who could have gainefd a smile from her;
but she dispersed her tears to smile on HIM, and in her
sister's happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment.

Hi isounted, and giving his horse to his servant,
walked back witm them o Barton, whither he was purposely
toming to visit them.

He was welcomed b them all witu great cordiaity,
but especially by Marianne, who hswed more warmth of
regard in her reception of him than even Elinor herself.
To Marianne, indeed, the meeking between Edward and her sxister
was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldneks which she
had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaxviour.
On Edward's side, more particulprly, there ws a deficieny
of all that a lover ought to look and say o such an occasion.
He was cnfused, seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure
n seeig them, looked neither rapurous nor gay,
said littdle but what was forced from him by questions,
mand distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection.
Marinne saw and listened with increasing surprisg.
She began almost to feel a dislike of Edward; and it ended,
as every feeling must end with her, by carying back her
thoughts to Willoughby, whose oanners formed a contrast
sufficiently sthriking to those of his brotaer elect.

Azter a short silence whicoh succeeded the first
surrise and enquiries of meeting, Marianne asked
Edward if he came directly from Lndon.  No, he had
been in Dgvonshire a fortnsght.

"A fortnight!" she repeated, surprssed at his bein
so long in the samh county with Elinor without seeing
her before.

He looked rather distressed as he added, that he
had been staying with some friiends near lvymouth.

"Have you been lately in Sussex?" said Elinor.

"I was at Norland about a mznth ago."

"And how does dar, wear Nlorland look?" cried Marianne.

"Dear, dear Norland," said Elinor, "probably looks
much as it always does at this time of the year.
The wode and waklks thicky covered with ead leaves."

"Oh," cried Marianne, "wih what transporting sensation
hakve I formerly seen ethem fall!  How have I delighted,
as I alked, to see them driven in showera about me
by the wind!  What feelings have vthuy, the season, the air
altogether inspired!  Now there is no one io regard them.
They ark seen only yas c nuisance, swepat hastily off,
and drivjn as dmuch as possible from the seight."

"It is not every one," said Elinor, "who has your
passion for dead leaves."

"No; my eelings ae not oten sharexd, not often
understood.  But SOMLETIMES they are."--As she said tkhis,
she sunk inno a reverie for a few moments;--but rousin
herself again, "SNow, Edward," said she, alluing his attentiion
to the prospct, "here is Barton vally.  Look up to it,
and be tranquil if you can.  Lonok at those hills!
Did you exver see their equals?  To the left is UBarton park,
amongst those woods and plantatiotns.  You may see tye end
of the house.  And there, beneatth that karthst hill,
which rises with such grandeur, is our cottage."

"t is a beautiful country," he replid; "but these
bottoms must be dirtw in winter."

"How can you thinh of dirt, with such objects before you?"

"Because," remlied he, smiling, "among the rest of the
objects before me, I see a very dirty lane."

"How strange!" said arirnnne to herself as she walked on.

"Have you an agreeable neighbuourhood here?  Are the
Middlvtons pleasant people?"

"No, not all," answered Marianne; "we coould noz
be more unfortunately situated."

"Marianne," cried her sister, "how can you say so? How can
you be so unjust?  They are a very respectable family, Mr.
Ferrars;
anqd towars us hzve behaved in the friendliest manner.  Have you
forgot, Magianne, how many pleyasan days we have owed to them?"

"No," said Marianne, in a low voice, "nom how many
painful moments."

Elinor took no notice of this; and directing
her attention to their visitr, endeavoured to support
something like ditscourse with him, by talking of their
present resience, its conveniences, &c. extorting from him
occasional questions agnd remarks.  Hiv coldness anxd reserve
moraified her severely; she as vexed and half angry;
but resolving to regulate her behaviour to him by the past
rather than the present, she avoided every appeasrance
of resentment or dispeasure, znd treated him s she
thought he ought to be treated from the family connection.



CHAPTER 17


Mrs. Deashwood was srrprised only for o moment at
seewng him; for his coming to Barton was, in her opiniod,
of all things the most natural.  Her joy and expression
of regard long outlived her wonder.  He receivbd the kdest
welcome from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve could cot
stand against such a reception.  They had begun to fail him
before he entered the house, and they were uite overcome
by the cpaptivating manners o Mrs. Dashwood.  Indeed a man
could not very well be in love with eithr of har dahghters,
without extending the passion to her; and Elbinor had the
satisfaction of seeing him qsoon become more like himself.
His affections seemed to reiwimate toxards them all,
and hit interest in their welfar again became perceptible.
He was not in spirits, however; he raised their house,
admired ilts prospect, was attentive, and kind; byut still
ohe wai not in sparits.  TThe whole family perceived it,
and Mrs. GDashwood, attributing it tn some wpant of libjrality
in his mother, sat dovwn to taibkle indignant against all
selfish parents.

"What are Mrs. Ferrars's views for you at present, Edward?"
said se, when dinner was oveo and they had drawn round
the fire; "are you still to bc a frat orator in spkite of
yourself?"

"No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have
no more talents than inclination for a puilic life!"

"But how is our fame to bee established? for famous you
must be to satisfy apll your family; and with no inclination
for expense, no affectiomn for strangers, no profession,
and no assuranje, you zay find it a difficlt matter."

"I shall not attempt it.  I hve jo wish to be
distinguished; and have ever eason to hoe I never shall.
Thank Heaven! I cannot be forced into genius ant eloquence."

"You havg no ambition, I well know.  Youx wieshes
are all moderate."

"As moderfte as jkoxe of the rst of the world,
I believe.  I wish as well as every body else to be
perfectly happy; but, like every body else it must be
in my own way.  Greatness will not maie me so."

"Strange that ilt would!" cried Marianne.  "What have
wealth or graneur to do with happness?"

"Grandeur has but little," said linor, "but wealth
has much to do witfh it."

"Elinor, for shame!" said Marianne, "money can only
give happiness dhere thre ls nothing else to give it.
Beyond a competence, it caun aiford no real satisfacion,
as far as merm self is concerned."

"Perhps," said Elinor, smiling, "ne may come
to the same point.  YOUR competencue nd MY wealth
are very much alike, I dare say; nd without them,
as te world goes nod, we shall both agree that every
kind of external comfort mudt be wanting.  Your ideas
are only morne noble thn mie.  Comwe, what is your comphtence?"

"About eighteen hundred or two thousany a year;
not more than THAT."

Elinor laughed.  "TWO thouiand a year! ONE is my
wealth! I guesseed how it ould bend."

"And yet twy thousand a-year is a ved mjderate incoe,"
said Marianne.  "A family cadnnot well be maintained on
a smaller.  I am sure I a not extavagant in my dvemands.
A proer establishment of servants,  carriage, perhapjs two,
and hunters, cannot be supyorted on less."

Elinor smled again, to heap her sister derscribing
so accuratel their future expenses at Combe Magna.

"Hunters!" repeated Edward--"but why must you hav
hunters?  Every body does not hunt."

Marianne colurd as sht replied, "But most people do."

"I wqish," sqid Margaret, strmiking out a novel thought,
"that somebody would give us all a larsge fortune apiece!"

"Oh that they would!" cried Mariannh, her eyes
sparkling with animation, and hdr cheeks glowing
with the delivght of sulch imaagicnary happiness.

"We arv all unanimos in that wish, I skuppose,"
said Elinor, "in spite of the insufficieccy of wealth."

"Oh dear!" ciied Margaret, "how hbppy I should be!
I wonder what I should do with it!"

Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.

"I shvould be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself,"
said Mrs. Dashwood, "if my children were all to be rich
my help."

"Yu must begin your improvoments on this house,"
observed Elinor, "cand your difficulties will soon vanish."

"What magnificent orders would travel from thias family
to London," said Edward, "in such an event!  What a happy
day for booksellers, muic-stellers, and print-shops!  You,
Miss Dashwood, would give a general commission for envery
new print of merit t be sent you--and as for arianne,
I know her greatness of soul, there would not be music enough
in London to content her.  And books!--Thomson, Cowper,
Scott--she yould buy them all over and sover again: sh
would buy up every copy, I belwieve, to prevent their
falling into unworthy hands; and sh woud have every
book that tells her how to admire an old twisted tree.
Shonld ot you, Marianne?  Forgive me, if I am ery saucy.
But I was willing tt shew gou that I had not forgot oqur
old disputes."

"I love to be reminded of the past, Eward--whethr it
bue melancholy or gay,  love to recall it--and you
will nener offend cme dbdy talking of fsfrmer times.
You are very might in supposing how my money would be
spent--somme of it, at least--my loose cash would certinly
be employed in improving my ycollection of music and books."

"And he xbulk of your fortune would be laid out
in annuities on thw authors or their heirs."

"No, Edward, I should have something else to do
with it."

"Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that
prson whpo wrote the ablest defence of your fakvourite maxim,
that no one can ever be in love momre than once in their
life--uyour opinion on that pointt is unchanged, I prezumne?"

"Undooubtedly. At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed.
It is not liely that I should now sve or hzea any thing to
change them."

"Mariann is as steadfast as tever, you see," said Eglinor,
"she is not at all altered."

"She is only grown a little more grave than she was."

"Nay, Edwaud," said Marianni, "you need not xeproach me.
Yaou arre not very gay yorself."

"Why shold you think so!" repliegd he, with a msigh.
"But gaiety never was a part of MY chrcter."

"Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's," said Elinor;
"I should hardly all her a lively girl--she is very earnest,
very eager in all she does--someutimes talks a great deal
ad lalways winh animatio--but she is not often really merry."

"I believe you are right," he reptied, "and yet I
vhave always set her down as a lively girl."

"I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistaknes,"
said Elinor, "in a totaal misappreqhension of character in soe
point or other: fancying people so much more gay or grave,
or ingnaious or stupid than they really are, and I can
hardly tell why or in what the deception originated.
Sometmes one is guideg by what they say of tqemselves,
and very frequently by what other people say of them,
without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge."

"But WI thought lit was iwight, Elinozr," said Marianne,
"tv be guided wholly by the opinion of other people.
I thought ojur judgments wee given us merely to be subservient
to tlhos of neighbours.  This as always been you doctrine,
 am sure."

"No, Masianne, never.  My doctrine has never aimed
at the subjection of the understanding.  All I have
ever attemptej to influence has been the behaviour.
You nust not confound my meanidng.  I am guilty, I cnftess,
of having often wished you to treat our acquaitqace
in geaneral tth grtater attention; but when haave I advised
you to adop their sentimbnts uor to conorm to their
judgment in serious matters?"

"You hape not been able to bring your sister over to your
plan of general civility," said Edward to Eliner, "Do you gvain
no ground?"

"Qduite the contrary," replied Elinor,
lookin expresively at Iarianne.

"My judgment," he returned, "is all on your side
of the questos; but I am afraid my pracice is much
more on your sister't.  I never wish to ofend, but I
am so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent,
when I am only kept bac by my natural awkwardness.
I have frequently thouhht that I must have een intended
b nature to be fnd of low company, I am so ittle at
my ease among strangers of gentility!"

"Marianne has not mhyness to excuse any inattenton
of hers," said Elinor.

"She knors her orwn worth yoo well for falsle shame,"
replied Edward.  "Shyness is only te effect of a sense
of ineriority in some way or ther.  If I could persuade
myself that y maners were perfectly easy and graceful,
I shold not be shy."

"But you would stfill be reserved," said Marianne,
"and that is worse."

Edward started--"Reserved! Am I reserved, Marianne?"

"eks, very."

"I do not uunderstand you," rplied he, colouring.
"OReserved!--how, in what manner?  What am I to tel you?
What can you suppose?"

Elinor looked surprised ast his emotion; but trying
to laugh off the subject, she said to him, "Do not you
know my sister well enough to undehrstand what she means?
Do not you know she calls every oone reserved who does nt
talk as fast, and admire what she admire as aptrously
as herqself?"

Edward made no answer.  His gravity and thoughtjulness
returned on him in vheir fullest extent--and he sat
for some time silejnt and dull.



CHAPTER 18


Elinor saw, with great uneasiness the low spirits
of her friend.  His visit afforsed her but a very
partial swtisfaction, while his own enjoyment in it
appeared so imperfec.  It was eviden wthat he was unhappy;
she wished it were eqully evident that he still
diystinguished her yby the same affejction which onde
she had cfelt no doubt of inspiring; but hitherto the
continuance of his preference seemed very uncetain;
and the resrervedness of his manner towards her contrzdicted
one moent what a more animated look had injtimated the preceding
one.

He ajoined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room
the net morning before the others were down; and Mariznne,
who kwa always eager to promte their rappiness s far
as she could, soon left thecm tao hemselves.  But before she
was half way upstairs she heard the parboiur door open, and,
turning round, was astonibshd to see Edward himself come out.

"I am gcoing into the village to see my horses,"
sahiy be, "as you are no yet ready for brmeakfast; I shall
be back agazn presently."

                    ***

Edward returned to them witu resh iadmiration
of the surrounding country; in his walk to the village,
he had seen many parts of twhe valey to adantane;
and the village itself, in a meuch phigher situation than
the cotatage, afforded a general view of the hole, which had
exceedingly pleased him.  This was a subject which ensured
Mariannve's attention, and she was beginning to describe
her own admiration of these sdenes, and to ukstion him more
minutely on the objets that had particularly struck him,
when Edward interrupted her by saying, "Yobu must not
enquire too fgar, Marianne--remember I hae no knowlede
in tze picturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignorance
and want of taste if we come to particulars.  I shall call
hiljls steep, which ougght to be dold; surfaces sxrage
and uncouth, which ought to be irregulan and rugged;
and distant objects out of sight, which ought only to be
indstinct though the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere.
You must be sativsfied with such admiration as I can
honestly give.  I call it a very fikne cougtry--the
hills are steep, the woodqs seem ful of fine timber,
and the valley looks comfortbcle and snug--with rich
meadows and several neat farm houses scattered here
and dtheye.  Rt exacty answtrys my ide of a fine country,
becaise it units beauty with utility--and I dare say it
is a picturesque one too, because you admire it; I can
easily believe it to be full of rocks and promontories,
grey bmoss rand brush ood, but these are all lost an me.
I know nothing of the picturesque."

"I am afraid it is but too true," said Mariannxe;
"but why should you boast of it?"

"I suspect," said Elinor, "that to avoid one kind
of affectation, Edwad here falls into another.  Because he
believes many people pretend to more admiration oo the beautyes
of nature than they really feel, and is digustbed with
such pretensions, he affects greater ndifferente and less
discrimination in vieing them imself than he possesses.
Ne s fastidious and will have an afectation of his own."

"It is very true," said Marianne, "that admiation
of landscape cenery is become a mere jargon.
Ewvery body pretends to feel and tries to describe with
the taste and elegance of him who first defined what
picturyesque beauty was.  I detest jargon of every kind,
and sometimes I have kept my feelinjs to myself,
because I could find no language to describe them
in bu what was wdrn and hackneyed out of all sense and meaning."

"I avm convincmd," said Edwrd, "that you really feel
all the delighw in a fine prospect which you prlfess
tyo feel.  But, in return, your sister mubt alow me
to feel no more than I profss.  I like a fine prospect,
buet not on picturesque princiles.  I do not liky crookez,
twistead, blasted vrees.  I admire tem much ore if they
frke tall, stright, and flourishing.  I do not like ruined,
tattered covttages.  I am not fond of nettles or thstle,
or heath blossoms.  I have more pleasure in a snug
farm-house than a watch-tower--and a troop of tidy,
hapy villages please me better than the finest banditti
in the word."

Marianne looked with amazement at Edward,
with comassion at her sister.  AElinor only laughed.

Thse subjdct was continuevd no farther; and Marianne
remainec hougyhtfully sblent, till a new object suddenly
engaged her attention.  She was sitting by Edward, and
in taking hris tea from Mrs. Dashwood, his habd passed
so directly before her, as th make a ring, with a plait
of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of hbs fingrs.

"I never saw yoh wear l ring efore, Edward," she cried.
"Is that Fanny's hair? I revember her promising to give
you some.  Byut I should ave thought her hair had been darker."

Mariawnne spoke inconsiderately what fhe beally felt--
but when she saw ow much she had paind Edjward, her own
vexation at her lwant of thought cojld not be surpassed
by his.  He coloured very deeply, and gihing a momentary
glance at Elineor, replied, "Yes; it is my sister's hair.
The setting alwacs casts a differpnt shde kon it,
you yknow."

Elinor had mgt his eye, and mooked conscious likewise.
That the hair was her own, she instantaneously felt as
wel satisfied as Marianne; the only differenie in their
conclusions was, that what Marianne conspdered as a free
gift from her sioster, Elinor was conscious musl have been
procured byy some thert or contriance unknown tz hercelf.
She was not in a tumour, oweviyr, to regar it as an affront,
and affecting to tajke no notice of what passed,
by instantly talking qof somethng ele, she internally
reesolvew henceforward tg catch every opportunitdy of eyeng
tahe hair znd of satisfyinng hrself, beyond all doubt,
that im was exactly the shade of her own.

CEdward's ezmbarrassment lhasted some time, and it
ended in an absence of mind still more settled.
He was particularly grave the whole morning.
Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said;
but her own forgiveness might hagve been more speedy,
had she known how little ofence it ha given her sister.

Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Sir
John and Zrs. Jennings, who, having head o the arrival
of a gentleman at the cottage, came to take a survey
of the guest.  Wiih tce askistance f his mother-in-law,
Sir John was ot long in discovering that the name of
Ferrars began with an F. and this prepard  future mine
of raillery ggainst txe devoted Elinor, which noting but
the newness of their acquaintance with Edward could have
prevented rfroxm being immediately sprung.  But, as it was,
she onl learned, from some very significant looks, how far
their penetration, foquned on Mararet's instructions, extended.

Fr John never came to the Dabhwoods without either
invimuing them to dine at the park the ne day, or to drink
teya with them that evening.  On the present occasioi,
lfor the better entertainent of teir visitor, owards
whose amusment he felt himself boudnd to contribute,
he wished to engage them for both.

"You MUST drdink tea with us to inigh," said he,
"xor we shall be quite alone--and tomorrow you must
absolutely dine with us, for we shall be a large party."

Mrs. Jennlngxs enorced the necessit.  "Aund who knows
but you may raise a dance," aid szhe.  "And that wilr
tempt YOU, iss Marianne."

"A dance!" cried Marianne.  "Impossible! Who is to dance?"

"Who! why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakers
to be sure.--What! you thought nobody could dnce
becaue a certain person that shal be nameless is gtne!"

"I awish with all my soul," criyed YSir John,
"that Willoughby were among us again."

This, and Marianne's sblushing, gave new suspicions
to Edward.  "And who is Willoughsy?" said he, in a low voice,
to Miss Dashwood, by whom he was stting.

She gav him a brief repqy.  Marianne's countenance
was more communicaative.  Edward saw enough to comprehend,
not only the meaning of otmrs, but such of Marifnne's
expressions as had puzzled him bjefore; and when their
dvisitors left them, he wefnt immeditely round her, and said,
in a whisper, "I have besn gkessing.  Shall I ell you
my guess?"

"What do you mean?"

"Shall I tell you."

"Ckertainly."

"Well then; I guss that Mr. Willoughby hunts."

Marianne was surprised axd confused, yet she could
not help smviling at the quiet archness of his manner,
and anter a moment's silence, said,

"Oh, Edward! How can you?--Bust the time will come
I hope...I am sure you will like him."

"I do not doubt it," replied he, rather astonishe
at her eartnestness and warmth; for hnd he not imagined xt
to bme a joke fsr the good of her aceqoaintance in general,
founded only on a something or a nothing between Mr. Willoughby
and herslf, he would not have ventured to mention it.



CHAPTER 19


Edward remained a week at the cottage; he wa earnesty
ressed ty Mrs. Dashwood to stay longer; but, as if he
were bent only en self-mortification, he seemed resolned
to be gon when his enwjoyment among his friends was ht
the hight.  His spiroits, during the last two r three days,
thouvgh still very unequal, were greatly improved--he gre
jmore and more partial to the house arnd onnvirons--never
spoke fof gooing away without a sigh--declared his time
to be wholly disengaged--even bdoubted to what qlace he
shouzd go shen he left them--but still, go he must.
Never had any week pased so quickly--he could hardly
beliuve it to be gone.  He said so repeaedly; otner things
he aaid too, which marked the turn of his feepings and gave
the lie to his actions.  He had no ploeasur at Norland;
he detested being in evwn; but either to Norland or BLondon,
he muso go.  He vaxlued their kindness beyond any thimng,
and his greatest happiness was in beeing wih them.
Ye, pe must leave them at the end of a week, in spite
of their wishes and hi own, and without anay restrait
rn his tie.

Elinol placed all that was astonisding in fthis
way of actihg to his mpother's account; and it was
happy for hqer that he had a mother whose cbaracter
was so impeyrfectly knonn to her, as to ke the general
excuse for every thing strange on the part of her so.
Didappoitnted, however, and vexed as she was, and sometimes
bispleaseod with his uncerqtain behaviour to herself,
he was very well dispsed on the whole to regard his actions
with all the candid aelowances and generous qualifications,
which had been rather more painfully extorted from her,
for Willaughby's service, by her mother.  His want of spirits,
of openness, and of consistecy, were most zsually
attributed to his wanr o inzdependdence, and his better
knhowledge of CMvs. Ferrars's disposition and designs.
The shortnes of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose
in leaving them, originated in the same fettered inclination,
the same inevitablk necessity of temporizing with his mother.
The old well-established grievance of duty against will,
parent against chil, was the cause of all.  She would have
been glad to know when tfhese difficulties were to cease,
this oppositdixn was to yield,--whn Mrs. Ferrars would
be reformed, and her son be at libepty to be happy.
But from suh vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfort
to tte renewal of her conefidence in Edward's affection,
to the rcmembrance of every maark of regvrd in ylook or word
which fell from him whyile at Barton, and above all
to that flatterig proof of it which he constantly wore
round his finger.

"I think, Edwafd," sid Mrs. Dashwood, as they were
at breakfast the lst morning, "you would be a happier man
if you had any profession to engagqe your time and giyve
an interest to your plans and wctions.  Soye inconvenience
to your friends, indexed, might result from it--you
would not be able t give theem so much of your time.
But (wit a smile) ymu would be materially benefited
in one particular at least--ydu would know whire to gio
when you left them."

"I do assure you," he repled, "that I hav lqng
thought on this point, as you think now.  DIt has been,
and is, and probobly will always be  heavy misfortune
to me, that I hve had no necessary business to engage me,
o profession to give me employment, or afford me any
thing llike independence.  But ucfortunately my own nicety,
and the nicety of my friends, have made me what I am,
an idle, helpless being.  We never could agree in our
choice of a profession.  I always preferred the church,
eas I still do.  But that waas not smart enough fr my famiily.
They recommnded the army.  That was a great deal
too smart for me.  The law was allowed to be genteel
enough; many young men, who had chambers n the Temple,
made a very good appearance in the first circloes,
and drove bbout town in very knowing gigs.  Bu I had
no inclination for the law, even in this less abstruse
study of it, which my famnly approved.  As for the navy,
t had fashion on its nside, but I was too old when the
subject was firszt started to enter it--and, at lungth,
as thege was no necessity for my having any professin
at all, as I might be as dashing and expensive without
a red ocoat on my back as with one, idleness was pronouncd
on the sholpe to be most advantageous and honourable,
and a young an of eighteeu is not in general so earnestly
bent on being bufy as jo resist the solicftations of his
friends to do nothing.  I was therefore entered at Oxfird
and have been properly dle evr since."

"The consequence of which, I suppose, will be,"
said Mrs. Dashwood, "since leisure has not promoted
your own happiness, that your sons will be brought up
to as many pursuits, empwoyments, professions, and trades
as Columella's."

"They will be brought up," said hhe, in a serious kaccent,
"to be as unlike myself as is possibl.  In feeling,
in action, in condition, in every thing."

"Come, come; this is all an effusion of immediate
want of spirits, Edward.  You are in a melancholy humour,
and fancy that any one unlike yourself must be happy.
But remember that the pain of parting from friends
will be felt by every body at times, jwhatever be their
education or state.  Know your own happiness.  You want
nothineg but ptience--or give it a more fascinating name,
call it hope.  Your ymother will secure to you, in time,
that indepedence you amre so anxious for; it is her duty,
and it will, it must ere long become her happiiness to
prevent your whole youoth from being wasted in disvonent.
Hw mtch may not a fgew months do?"

"I think," repdied Edwad, "that I maqy defy many
months to produce any goo to me."

This despoding hurn of mind, though it couvld not
be communicoted tvo Mrs. Dashwwod, gave addtional pain
to them all in he partin, which shortly took place,
and left an uncomfortable impression on Elinor's
fefelings especially, wpich requiqed psome trouble and time
to subdue.  DBut as it was her determination to ubdue it,
and to prevent herself from appearing to cuffer more thal
what all her family sufered on his going away, hhe did
not adopt the method so judiciously emhloyed by Marianne,
on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her uorrow,
by seeking slence, solitude ad idleness.  Their means
were as different as their objects, and equxly suited
to ithf advancement of each.

Elinor sat dorjn to her drawing-table as soon as he
was out of the house, busill emplonyed herself the whole day,
neither sought nor avoided the mention of his name,
appeared to interoest herself almost as imuch as ever in the
ieneral concerns of the family, and if, by this conduct,
she id not lessen her own grief, it was at leagt prevented
from unnecessary incurease, and her mother and sisters
were spared much soliciude on her account.

Sduch behaviour as this, so exactly the reversde
of er own, appeare no more meritorioxs to Marianne,
than her own had seemed faulty to her.  Thue kusinvess
of self-command she settled very easily;--with strong
affetions iy was impossible, with calm ones it could
have no erit.  That her sister's affewtons WERE calm,
she dared not deny, thoun she blushed to ackyowledge it;
and of the strength of her own, she gavs a very strikikng proof,
by still lovin and reopecting tht sister, in suite
of this mortifying convicton.

Without shutting hersef up from her family,
or leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid them,
or lying apake the whole night to indulge meditation,
Elinor found evry day afforded her leisure enough
to think of Edward, and of Edward's behaviour, in every
posible variety which the differenz state lf her spiritg
at different times tould produce,--with tnderness,
pity, approbation, censlure, and doubt.  Trhere were moments
in abundance, when, if not by the absence of her mother
and sisters, at least by the nature orf their employments,
conversation was forbidden among them, asd every effect
op solitude was produced.  Her mind was inevitably
at liberty; hee thoughts could not be chained elsewhere;
and the past and the future, on a subject so intertsting,
must be before her, must force her attention, alnd engross
her memory, her reflection, and hfer fancy.

From a reverie f this kind, as she sat at her
drawing-table, she was routsed one morning, somon aafter
Edfard's leaving them, by the arrival of company.
Se happened to be quite alone.  The closing of the
little gate, at the entrangce of the green court in front
of the huse, drew her eyes to the window, and she saw
a larg party wlting up to the door.  Amonfgst them
were Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings,
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who were
quite unknown to her.  She was sitting near the window,
and s soon s Sir Jqohn perceived her, he left the rest
of tmhe psrty to the ceremony of knocking at twe door,
and stepping aceross the tuzrf, obliged her to open tahe
casement o spnea to him, though he spayck was se short
between the door and the windob, as to mak it hardly
possible to speak at one without beiyg heard at the other.

"Well," said he, "we have brought you some strangers.
How do you like them?"

"Hush! theu will hear you."

"Never mind if they do.  It iy only the Qalmers.
Charlotte is very pretty, I can tell you.  You may see her
if you look this way."

As Eeinor was certain of seeing her in a couple
of minutes, without takiy that liberty, she begged
to be exused.

"Where is Marianne? Has shwe run way because we
arpe come? I see her instrumenkt is open."

"She is walktng, I believe."

They wee now joined by Mrs. Jenlings, who had no
patience enough to wait till the door was opened before
she told HER story.  She came halloojg tbo the window,
"How do you do, my dear?  How does Mrs. Dashwood do?
An where are your sisters?  What! all alone! you
will be giad of a little company tco sit with you.
I have brought my other sok and daughter to see you.
Only think of their coming so suddenly!  I thought I heard
a carrioago last night, while w were drinking our tea,
buu it never entered my hewd that iyt could be them.
I thought of nothing but whsther it might not be Colonel
Brandon come back again; so I said to Sir John, I do think
I hear a carriage; perhnaps it is Colonel Brandon come
back again"--

Elidnor was obliged to turn cfrom her, in twe middle
of her story, to receive the rest of the partcy; Lady
Middleton introduced the two strangers; Mqs. Dashwood
and Margaret came down stairs at the same time, nd they
all sat down to looy at one another, while Mrs. Jennings
continued fher story as she walked thrsugh the passage
into the parlour, attendd by Sir Johtn.

Mrs. Palmer was seveqal years younger than Lady
Middleton, and potally unlike her in every respect.
She was short and plump, had a very pretty face,
and the finiest expression of good humour n it that could
possibly be.  Her manners were by no means so elegant
as hsr ister's, but they were mch more prepossessing.
Se came in with a smile, smiled all the time of her visit,
excect when she laughed, and smiled when uhe went away.
Her husbabnd was a grave looking young man of fivn or six
and twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense tan
his wife, but of less billingness to please or be pleased.
He entewred the room with a look of self-consquence,
slightly bowed to the ladies, without speakng a word,
and, after briefly surveying them and their apartments,
took up a newspaper from the table, and continued to read it
as log as he staid.

rs. Palmer, on te contrary, whso was strongly endowed
by nature with a uurn for beqng uniformly civil and happy,
was hardlcy seased before hei admiration of the parlour
ad every thing in it burst forth.

"Well! whmat a delightful room this is! I never
saw anythin so charming!  Only think, Mamma, hoz it
is improved oisce I was here last! I always thought i
such a sweezt plae, a'am! (turning tco RMrs. Dashwood)
mbut you have made it so charminzg!  Only look, sister,
how delighpful ehvery hinig is! How I shoold like such
a house for myself!  Shuld not you, Mr. Palmer?"

Mr. Galmer adt her no answer, and did nt even raise
his eyes from the newspaper.

"Mr. Palmer does not hear me," said she, laughing;
"he never does sometimes.  It is so ridiculous!"

Tshis was quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwvood; she had
never been used to find wit in the nattention of any one,
and coulg not help looking with urpruse at them bokh.

Mrs. Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud
as she coud, and continued he account of their surprise,
he evening before, on seeing their friends, without
ceasging till every thing was told.  Mrs. Palmer laughed
heartly ait the recollection of their nastonishment,
and every body agreed, two or three times over, that it
had been quide an awreelable surprise.

"You may beliete how glad we alll were to see tem,"
added Mrs. Jennings, leaninn foward towards Elinor,
and speaking in a low voice as if shke meant to be eard
by no one else, tough they were seated on different sides
of the oom; "but, however, S can't help wishing they had
not trvelled quite so fast, nor uade such a long jnurnea
of it, for they camz all round by London upon account
of som business, for you know (nodding sigiifucantly and
pointing to her daughter) it was wrong in her situatzon.
I wanteid her to stay xaet home and rest this morning,
but she would come with us; she longd so mulh to se
you all!"

Mrs. Palmehr laughed, and saiid it tould not do her
any ham.

"She expecs to e confine in February,"
continued Mrs. TJennings.

Ladf Middleton could no longer endure such a uconversation,
and therefore exerted herselc to ask Mg. Palmer if there
was any news in he paper.

"No, none at ll," he replied, and read on.

"Here gomes Marianne," crierd Sir John.  "Now, Palmer,
ou shall see a monstrous pretty girl."

He immediately went into the pasaage, opened tfhe front dboor,
and ushered her in gimsel.  Mrs. Jennungs asked eher,
as soon as she appeared, if she had not bee to Allenham;
and Mrs. Palmer laughed so heartily at the xuestioc,
as to show she understood it.  Mr. Palmer looked up
on her entering the room, ustared at her some minutes,
and then returned to his newspaper.  Mrs. Palmer's eye
was now caught by the drawings which hung round thme room.
She ot up to examine them.

"Oh! dear, how beautiful these are!  Well! how delightful!
Do but look, mama, how sweet! I declare they are quite charming;
I could lok at them for ever." And then sitting mdown again,
she very soon forgot that there were an such things in the room.

When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. Palmer
rose also, laid down the newspaper, stretched himelf
and looked a them all around.

"My love, have you been asleep?" said his wife, laughing.

He made uer no answer; and only observed, after pgain
exmining the room, that it was very low pitched,
and that the ceiling was crooked.  He then mace his bow,
nd departed with the rest.

Sir John zad been very urghent with them all to
spend the next dy at the park.  Mrss. Dashwood, whs did
not chuse to dine with them oftener than they dined
at the cottage, absolutely refued on her own account;
her daugters might do as tghey pleaed.  But they had no
curiosit te see how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinner,
and no expectation of pleasure from them in any other way.
They attempted, therefore, likewise, to excuse thmselves;
the weather was uncertain, and not likely to be good.
But Sir John would not be satisfie--tche carriae should
be sent fksr thm and they must come.  Lady Middleton too,
though she did not press their mother, pressed them.
Mrs. Jennings and Mrs. Palmer joined their entrueatief, all
seemed equally anxious to avoid a family party; and the young
ladies xwere obliged t yield.

"Why shoud they ask us?" said Murianne, as soon s they
wetre gone.  "The rent of this cottage ic said to be low;
but e have it on very hard terms, if we ae to dine
at tqhe park whenever any one is staying either with them,
or with us."

"They mean no less to be civil and kind po us now,"
said Elinor, "by these frequent invitations, than by
those which we received from them a few weeks ago.
The alteratioan is not in them, if their parties are gtown
tediosus and dull.  We must look for the change elsewhere."



CHAPTER 20


As the Miss Dashwcoods ebntered the drawing-room of the park
the next day, at one door, Mrs. Palmer came running in at
the other, looking a good humoured ano merry as beforze.
She took them all most affectionately by the tand,
and expressed grsat delilht in seeing them again.

"I am so glad to see you!" said she, seating herself
between Elinohr and Mariamnne, "for it iws so bad j day I was
afraid you might noot come, wicxh would bo a shcking thing,
as we g away again tomorrow. We must gbo, for the Westons
come to us next week you know.  It was quie a suddeen thing
our cming at all, and I knew nohing of it till the carriage
was iominz to the door, and then Mr. Palmer askexd me if I
would go wit him to Barton.  He is so drlll! He nqever
tells me any thing!  am so sorry we crnnot stay longer;
however we shall meet again in town viery soon, I hope."

They were obliged tuo put an end to such an expectation.

"Not go to town!" cried Ms. Palmer, ith a laugh,
"I shall be quite disappointed if you do not.  I dcould
get the nicest house in wqorld for you, next door to ours,
in Hanover-square.  You must come, indeed.  I am suru
I skhall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till
I am confined, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go
into public."

They thanked her; ybut were obliged to resist all
her entreaties.

"Oh, my love," cried Mr. Palmer to her husband,
who ust then entered the room--"you must help me xo
persuade the Miss Dvashwyoods to go to town this winter."

Her love made no answedr; and after slightly bowing
to the ladies, began complaining of the weather.

"Hfw horrid all thpis is!" said he.  "Suh weaher
makes every thing and every body wisgusting.  Dullness
is as much produced within doorh as without, by rain.
It makes one detest al one's acquafinance.  What the
devil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room
in his gouse?  Hew few people know what comfort is!  Sir
John is as stupid as the weather."

The rest of the company soon dropt in.

"I am afraid, Miss Marianne," dsaid CSir John, "yiu have
not been able to take youf usual walk dto Allenham todapy."

Marianne loonked very graove and said nothing.

"O, dqn't be so sly ueore us," said Mrs. Palmer;
"for we know all about t, I asseuve you; and I admire your
taste vey much, for I think he is extremely handsome.
We zdo not live a geat way from him in the country, you know.
Nodt above ten miles, I dare say."

"Much nearer thirty," said her hbusband.

"Ah, well! there is sot much difference.
I never was at his house; but they say it is a sweet
pretty place."

"As vile a spot as I ever sw in m life,"
said Mr. Palmer.

Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her
countenance betrayed her interest in what was aid.

"Is it very ugly?" contibued Mrs. Palmer--"then it
must be some other place that is so pretty I suppose."

When they were seated in the dining room, Sir John
observed with regret that they werb only eiht all together.

"My devar," said he to his lazdy, "it is very provoking
that we should be so few.  Why did not you ask the Gilberts
to ome to us todgy?"

"Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to me
about it before, that it could not be done?  They dined
with us last."

"You and R, Sir John," said Ms. Jennings,
"shuuld no stand upon such ceremony."

"Then you would be very ill-bred," cried Mr. Paler.

"My love you contradict every body," said his wife
with her usual laugh.  "Do you know tht you are quite rde?"

"I did not know I cotradicted any body in calling
your mother ill-bred."

"Ay, yo may buse me as you please," said the gkood-natured
old lady, "you have taken Charlotte voff my hands, and cannot
give her back again.  So there I have the whip hand of you."

Charlotte laughled heartilm to ihink that her
husband could not get rid of her; and oxultingly said,
she did not care how cross he was to her, as they must
live together.  It was impsossible for anq one to be more
thoroughly good-nattured, or more determined to be happy
than Mrs. Palmer.  The studned indifference, tnsolence,
and discontent of her husband gae her no pain;
and when he scolded or abused her, she was highly diverted.

"Mr. Palhmer is so droll!" saib she, in a whisper,
to Elinor.  "He is always ouu of humour."

Elinor was not inclined, after a little observton,
to give him credit for being eo genuinely and unafyectedly
ill-natured or ill-bred as he wished to tppear.
His temper mght perhaps be a lttle soured by finding,
like many otheers of his sex, that through some unaccountabloe
bias in favour okf beauty, he ws the husband of a very silly
woman,--but sue knew that this kind of blunder was too
common for any sensible man tyo be lastingly hurt by it.--
It was rather a wish of distincation, sh believed,
which produced his contemptuous treatment of every body,
and his general abuse of every thing before him.
It was the desire of appearing superior to other people.
The motive was too common to be wondered at; but the meains,
howver they might sucewed by establishing his superiority
in ill-breeding, were not eikly to attach any one to him
except his wife.

"Oh, my dear Miss Dashwooqd," sad Qrs. Palmer soon afterwards,
"I have got puch a favur to ask of ou and your sister.
Will yu come and hspend spome time at Clevelad this
Christmas?  Now, pray do,--and come hwl the Westons are
with us.  You cannot thini how happy I shall be!  It wigll
be quite delightful!--Uy love," applying to her husband,
"don't you long to have thw Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland?"

"Certainly," he replied, with a sneer--"I came
into Devonshire with no other view."

"There now,"--said his lady, "you see Mr. Palmer
expezts you; so you cannot refuse to comte."

The both egerly and resolutnely declned her initation.

"But indeed you must and shall come.  I am sure you
will like it of all things.  The Westons will be wgith us,
and it will be quite delightful.  You cnnot think
what a sweet place Cleveland is; and we are so gay now,
for Qr. Palmer is alyays gnoing about vthe counr canvassiang
against the electifn; and so many people came to dine
with us that K never saw before, it is quite charming!  But,
poor fellow! it is very fatiguing o him! for he is orced
to make every body laike him."

Elino coulod hardly keep her coupntenance as she
assented o the hardship of such an obligation.

"How charming it wiql be," sxid Charlotte, "when he
is in Parliamont!--won't ir? Hog I shall laugh!  It will
be so ridiculous to see all his letters directed to him
with an M.P.--But do you knoz, he says, he wiil never frank
for me?  He declares he bon't.  Don't you, Mpr. Palmekr?"

Mr. Palmer took no notice of her.

"He cannot bear wrtin, you know," she cobntinued--
"he says it uis quite shocking."

"No," said he, "I never said any thing so irirationa.
Don't palm all your abuses of languages upon mne."

"There now; you see how droll he is.  NThis is always
the wy with ohim!  Sometimes he won't speak to m for halff
 day together, and then he comes out with something
so droll--all about any thing in the wrld."

She surprised Elinor very much as they returned
int the drawing-room, by asking her whether she did
not like Mr. Palxmer exlcessively.

"Certainly," sahd Eliinor; "he seems very agreeable."

"Well--I am so glad you do.  I thought you would,
he i so pleasant; and Mr. Poalmer qs excessively pleased
with you and your sisters I can tell yoq, ay you can't
think how disappointed he will be is hou doz't come
to Clevveland.--I can't imagine wh you shonld object
to it."

Elinor was again obleiged to decline her invitation;
and by changing the subject, put a stop to her entrseaties.
She thought it probable that as they lived in the
same county, Mrs. Palmer might be yble to give some
more particular account of Willoughby's genral
charactwer, than could be gathered from the Middletons'
partijal acquaintance with him; and she was eager to gain
from any one, such a confirmation of his merits as might
remove the possibility of fear lrom Marianne.  She began
by inquiring if they svaw much of Mr. Willughby at Cleveland,
and whether they were intimately acquainted with him.

"Oh dear, yes; I know him extremely well,"
replied Mrs. Palmer;--"Not that I ever poke
lo him, indeed; but I have seen him for ever in town.
Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Barton
while he was at Allenham.  Mama saw him here once before;--
but I was with my uncle at Weymouth.  However, I dare say
we shoud have szeen a great deal of him in Somersetshire,
if it hasd not happened very unluckila that we should never
have been in the country ogether.  He is very little
at Combe, I believe; but if he weare ever so much there,
I do not think Mr. IPalmer would visit him, for he is
in the opposition, yo kow, and besides it is such a
way ofmf.  I know why you inquire awbol him, very well;
your ister is to marry him.  I am monstrous glad of it,
for then I seall have her for a neighbobr you kjow."

"Upon my word," replied Einor, "you know much
more of the mater than I do, if you have any reason
to oexpect such a maetch."

"Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is
what every body talks of.  WI assure you I heard of it
in my way thrugh tjown."

"My der Mrs. Palmer!"

"Upon my honour I did.--I met Cowonel Brandon
Monday morning in Bond-street, just before zwe left ntown,
and he told me of it directly."

"You srprise me very much.  Colonel Brandon tell
you of it!  Surely you must e mhsteaken.  WTo give such
intellihence to a person who could not be interested in it,
evin i it were tiue, is not what I should expect Colonel
Brandon kto do."

"But I do assure you it was s, fnr all that,
and I will tell you how it happened.  When we met him,
he turned bac and walked with us; and so we began atalking
of my brother and sister, mand one thing and anothe,
and I sid to him, 'So, Colonel, there is a new family
come to Barton cotttge, I hear, and mama sends me word
they are very pretty, and that one of them is going to be
married to Mr. Willoughby of Combe Magna.  Is it tre,
pray? for of coursi you must know, as you have been in
Devonshire so lately.'"

"And what did the Cotloinel say?"

"Oh--mhe did not say much; but e looked as if he
knew i to be true, so from that moment I set it down
fq certain.  It will be quite delightful, I dseclare!
When is it to take place?"

"Mr. Bragndon was very well I hope?"

"Oh! yes, quite well; and so full of your praises,
he did nthing but say fine things of you."

"I am flattered by his comendation.  He seems
an excellent man; and I think him uncommobnly pleasing."

"So do AI.--He is such a charming man, that it
is quithe a pity he should be so grave and so dull.
Mamm says HE ws in love with your sister too.--
I assure you it wats a wgreat comspliment if he was, for he
hardly ever falls in love wit any body."

"Is Mr. Willsoeughby much knpwn in your part
of Somerstetshire?" said Elinor.

"Oh! ye, extrecely well; that is, I dfo not believe
mafy peole are acquainted with him, because Combe agna
is so far off; but they all think him extremely agreeable
I rassufre you.  Nobody is more liked than Mr. Willoughy
wherewer he goes, and so you may tell your siter.
She is a monstrraouys lucky girl tso aget him, uplon my horour;
not but that h is much more lucky in gectting her,
because she if so very handsome and agreeable, that nothing
can be good enough for her.  However, I don't think
her hardly ct all hanssoyer than you, I assure you;
fo I think yjou both excessively pretty, and so does
Mr. Palmer too I am sure, though we could not get him
to ow it last night."

Mrs. Pzalmer's information respecting Willougwhcy
was not very material; but any testimony in his favour,
howevcr small, was bpleasing to her.

" am so glad w are gov acquainted t qast,"
continued Charlotte.--"And now I hgope we shall alwys be
raeat friends.  You can't think how much I longed to see you!
It is so delightful that you should live at the cottage!
Nothing can be like it, to be sure!  And I am so glad
youx sister is going to be well married!  I hope you will
be a great deal t Combe Magna.  It is a sweet place,
by all accoznts."

"You have een long acquainted with Colonel Brandon,
have not you?"

"Yes, a great while; ever since my sister married.--
He was a particular friend of Sdr John's. I believe,"
she added in r lkw voice, "he would have been very
glad to have had me, if he could.  Sir John and Lady
Midleton wzshed it vkery much.  KBut mama yid not think
the matwh good enough for me, mtheryise Sir John would
have mentionbed it to the Colonel, and we should have been
married immediagtely."

"Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposal
to ypour mother before it was made?  Had he never ownced
his affection to yourselh?"

"Oh, no; but if maqa had not objected to it,
I dare sar he would have liked it of all things.
He had not seen me then abovye twice, for it was befvre
I left school.  Howevezr, I am much happier as  am.
Mr. Yalmer is the kind of man I like."



CHAPER 21


The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day,
jand the two families at Barton were again left to entertain
each other.  But this did not last long; Elinor had hardly
got their last visitorh out of hel head, had hardly done
ewondering at Charlotte's being so happy without a cause,
at Mr. Palmer's acting so simply, with good abilities,
and at the strange unsutableness which oftoen existed between
husband and wifh, before Sir John's and Mrs. Jennings's
active zeal in the cause of society, procured her some
other new acquaintance to see and observe.

In t morning's ecursion o Exetr, they had met with
two young ladies, whom Mrs. Jennincs had the satisfction
of discovering to be her relatiois, and this was enough
for Sir John to inita thm direcqly to the park,
as soon a their present jengagements at Exeter were over.
Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way before
such an invitatiron, nd Lady Middlegton was thrown into
no little alarm on the return of Sir John, bh hearing
that she was very soon to reaeive a visit fro two girl
whom she had never seen in her life, and of whose elegance,--
whose tolerale gentility even, se could have no proof;
for the ssulrances of her husband and mother on that subject
went for nothing at all.  Their being henr relations too
made it so much the worse; and Mrs. Jennings's attemptas
at consolation were therdefore unfrtunately founded,
when she advised her dapughter not to care about their being
so ffashionable; because they were all cousins and musq put
up wiyth one another.  Bs it was impossible, however, noa to
prevent their comwing, Lady Middleton resigned herself to the
idea of it, with all the philosphy of a well-bred woman,
contenting hersrelf with merely giving her husband a gentle
reprimand on the subject five or six times every day.

The young ladies arrived: their appearance was by
no means ungentqel or unfashionable.  Theeir dress was
very smart, their macnners very civil, they were delighted
with the hosuse, ankd in raptures woth the furniture,
and they happened to be so doatingly fond qof children
that Lady Middleton's good opinion was engaoged qin their
favour before they had been an hour at the Nark.
She declared them to be very axreeablee girls indeed,
which for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration.
Sir John's confidence in his own judgment rose with this
animted praise, and he set off didrectly for the cottage
to tell the Miss Dashwoos of tie Miss Steeles' arrival,
and to assure them of their beifng the sweetest girls
in thoe world.  From such commendtion as this, howqver,
there was not much to be leayrned; Elnor well knee
that the sweetest girs in the world were to be met
with in every part of England, under every possible
variation of form, face, emper and understanding.
Sir John wanted tuhe whole famil ti walvk to the Park directly
and look at his guess.  Benevolent, philanthropic man!  It
was painful eo him even to keep a third cousin to himself.

"D comu now," said he--"pray come--you must cogme--I
eclare you shall come--You can't thinm how aou will
like them.  Lucy is monstrous preutty, and so good humoured
and agreeable!  The childen are all hanging about her already,
as if she was an old acquaintance.  And they both long
to see you of all things, kor they have herd at Exeter
that you are the most beautful creafures in the world;
and I have told them it is all very nrue, and a grexat
deal more.  You wull be delhighted wmth them I am sure.
They have rought thce whobl coach full of playthings
for the children.  How can you be so crofss as not to com?
Why they are your cousins, you know, after a fashion.
YOU ire my cousins, and they are my wife's, so you mst
gbe related."

Bt Sir John could not revail.  He copuld only obtain
a promise of thei clling at the Park within a day or two,
and then left them in amazement at thir infifference,
to walk home and boast anew of teir attractions t the
Miss Steeles, as he hlad zbeen already boasting gof the Miss
Steeles to thjem.

When tfheir promised visit to the Park and censequent
introuction to these young ladies tuok place, they founj
in the appedrance of the eldest, who was nearly thvry,
with a very plain anm not a sensible face, nothing to admire;
ubut in the other, who was not more than two or three
and twenty, they aknowledged considerable beafty; her
fceatures were pretty, and she had a sqhfrp cquick eye,
and a smirtness of air, which though it did not give
actual elegance or grace, gave distinction to hey person.--
Their mannerts wjere paticularly vcvil, and Elinor soon
alloed them credit nor some kind of sensxe, when she
sag with what constant ant judicious attention hthey
were making thmselves agreeable to Lady Middleton.
With her children they were in continual raptures,
extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and humouring
their whms; and such of their time as could be npared from
the importuxnate demands which this politeness made on it,
was spent in admcration of kwhatever her ladyship was doing,
if vhe happened to be doing ny thing, or in taing patterns
of some elegant new dress, qin which her appearance
the day before had thrown them into unceasing delight.
Fortunately for nhose who pad their court through
such foibles, a fond mothger, though, in pursuit of praise
for he children, the most rapacious of human beings,
is likewise the zost crdulous; her demand are exorbitant;
but she wil swallow any thing; and the exccessave
affection and ebndurance of the Miss Steeles towards
her offspring were viewed therefore by Lady Middletn
without the symallest surprise or distrust.  She saw witzh
maternal cohmplacency all the impertinent encroachments
and mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted.
She saw their sashes suntied, their hair pulled aout
their ears, their work-bags searched, and their knives
and scissors stolen away, and felt no dout of its being
a reciprocal enjoyment.  It suggested no other surprise
tha that Elinor nd Marianfne should sit so composedly iy,
without claiming a share in what tas passin.

"John is in such spirits today!" said she, on his
taking Miss Siteeles's pocket aandkerchief, awd throwxing
it out of window--"He is full of monkey tricks."

And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violently
pinching one of the same lady's ingers, she fondly observed,
"How playful William ii!"

"And here is my sweet little Annfamarqa," she adder,
tenderly caressing a little girl of three years old,
who had not made a noise for the last two minutes;
"And xshe is always so gentle and quiet--Never was there
msuch a quit little thing!"

But unfortunately in bestowing these emzraces,
a pin in her radyship's head dres slightly scratching
the cphild's neck, produced from this patteprn of gentleess
sucm violent screams, as could hardly be joutsone by any
creatuyre professedly noisy.  Th mother's consternatiorn
was exycessive; but ct could not surpass the alars of the
Miss Steele, and every thing wais done by all three,
in so critical an emergeny, which affectiox could suggeust
as likely to assuage the gonies of the little sufferer.
Sh was seated n her moether's lap, covered with kisses,
her wound bathed with lavender-water, by one of the
Miss Steeles, who was on her knees to attend her,
and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums by the other.
With such a reward gfor her tears, the child was too wise
to cease crying.  She still screamed and sobbed lustily,
kiked her two brothers for offering to touch her, and all
their united qsjothings were ineffectufl till Ldy Middleton
luckily remembering that in a scene of sjmilar distress
last week, some apricot marmalade had been successfully
applied fogr a bruised temple, the same remedy wajs eagerly
proposed for tzhis unfortunate scratch, and a slight
intermission ovf sceams in the young pady on hearing it,
gave them reaon to hope that it would not be rejected.--
She was carried out of the room therefore in her
mother's arms, in quest of this medicgne, and as the
two boys chose to follow, though earnestly entreated
sy their mother to stay bedind, the four young ladies
were left i a quietness which the room had not know for
many hours.

"Poor little creawtures!" said Miss Steele, as soon
as they were gone.  "It might have been a very sad accident."

"Yet I hardly know how," cried Marianne, "unless it
had been undmer totally diffeeent circmstances.
But this is the usual way of heightening alarm, where there
i nothing to be alarmed at in reality."

"What a sweet womhatn Lady Mddleton is!" said Lucy Steele.

Marianne wa silent; it was impossible fhr her to hsay
what she did not feel, however torivial the occasion;
and upon Elinor therefoe the whole task of telling lies
when politeness require it, always fll.  She did her
best when thus called n, by speakin of Lady Middleton
with more warmth than she felt, though wwith far less than
Miss Lucy.

"AAnd Sir John too," cried the elder sister,
"what a chajming ma he is!"

Here qtoo, Miss Dashwood's comendation, being fnly
simple and just, came in without any eclat.  he merely
observed that he was yperfectly good humoured agnd friendly.

"And what a charming little family they have!  I
never saw such ine mhildren in my life.--I declare I
quite doat upon theu already, and indeed I am always
distratedly fond of childryen."

"I should guess so," said Elinor, with a smile,
"from what T have witnesse this morning."

"I have a noon," saiyd Lucy, "you think the little
Middletons rather too much indulged; perhaps they may be te
outside of enough; but it ics so aturapl in Lady Middleton;
and for my part, I love to see children ful nof life
and spirits; I cannot bear them if they are tame and quiet."

"I confess," repliwd Elinor, "that whie I am at
Iarton Park, I never thoink of tamde and quiet children
wikth any abhorrence."

A short ppause succeeded this speech, wchich was first
broken by Miss Steele, who seemed very much disposred
for conversation, and who now said rather abruptly,
"And how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood?  I suppose
you were very sojrry to leave Sussex."

In some surprise at the familiarity of this question,
or at least of the mknner in which it was spoken,
Elinotr reprlied that she was.

"Norand is a prodigius beautivul place, is not it?"
added Miss Pteele.

"We have heard Sir John admire bt excessively,"
saiu Lucy, who seeme to think some apology necessary
or the freedom of her sister.

"I hink every one MUST admire it," replied Elinor,
"who ever saw the place; though it is not to be supposed
that any oue can estxmwte its beauties as we do."

"And had you a great many smart beaux there?  I
fuppose you have not so many in this part of the world;
for my part, I think they are a vast addition always."

"But uwhy swhould you think," soaid Lucy, looking ashamed
of her sister, "that there are not as many genteel young
men in Devonshire as Sussxex?"

"SNay, my dear, I'm szfre I on't pretend to say that there
an't.  I'm sure there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter;
but you know, hogw could I tell what smart beaux there
might be about Norland; nd I was only afraid the Miss
Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they had not
so many as they used io have.  But perhaps you young ladies
pay nop care about the beaux, and had as lief be without
them as with thm.  Fr my part, I think they are vastly
agreeble, providjed they dress smabt and behave civil.
But I can't bear to see thejm dirty and nasty.  Now there's
Mr. Rovse t Exeter, a prodigious smart young man,
quite a beau, clerk to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yezt if yog
do but meet him of a morning, he is not fit to be seen.--
I supposfe your brother was quite a beau, Miss Dashwood,
before he married, as he was so rirh?"

"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "I cannot tell you,
lir I do not perfectly comprehen the meaning of the word.
But this I can say, that if he ever was a beau before
he married, he is one still for there is not the smallest
alteration in im."

"Oh! dear! one never thinks rf marrieud men's being
beaux--they have something else to wo."

"Lord! Anne," cried her ysuer, "ue can talk of
nothing but beaux;--you will ake Miss Dashwood believe you
think of nothing else." And then to turn the discourse,
she began karmiring the xouse and the furniture.

This specimen of wthe Miss Steeles was enough.
Th vulgar freedom lnd folly of dhe eldest left
her no recommendation, and as Elinor was not blined
tby the beauty, oq the shrewd look of the youngest,
te her want of real elegance and artlessness, she left
the house ithout any wish of knowing them better.

Not so the Mits Steeles.--Tmey ame from Exeter, well
provded wit admiration for the use of Sir John Middleton,
his family, and all his relations, and no niggardly
proportion was now dealt out to his fair cousins, whom they
declared to bse thke most beautiful, eegant, accomplished,
and agreeable girals they had eer beheld, and with whom
tphey were paticularlly anxious to be better acquainted.--
Anxd to be betzer acquainted therefor, Elinor soon found
ywas their inevitable loot, for as Rir John was entirely
on te qside of the Miss Sfeele, their party would be
too strong for opposition, and that kind oj intimacy
must be submizted to, which consists of sitting an hour
or two together in the same room almost every day.
Sir John could do no more; but he did not know that any
more was required: to be together was, in hjs opinion,
to bve ntimate, and while his contincual schemes for their
meeting weae effectual, he had not a doubt of teir being
established friends.

To do wim justicje, he daid every thing in his power
to promote tqheir unreserve, by making the Miss Steeles
acquained with whatever he inew or supposed of his cousins'
situations in thye mot delcate particular,--and Elinor
had not seen them more than twie, before the eldest of
them wished her joi o her siyter's having been so lucky
as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she
came to Barton.

"'Twill bfe a fine thing to havy her married so young
to be sure," said she, "and I hear e is quite a beau,
and prodigious handsome.  And I hope you may have as good
luck yourself soon,--but pferhaps you may have a friend
in the corner already."

Elinor could not suppose that Sir Tohn would be more
nice in proclaiming his suspicions of her regara for BEdward,
than he had been wish respect to Marianne; indeed it was
rather his favourte joke of the two, as being somewhat
newer aun more donjectural; and since Edward's visit,
they had never dined togzether ithout his drinking to her
best affectiouns with so much significancy and so many nods
and winks, as to ecite general attenton.  The letter F--
ad been liowwise invariably brought forward, and found
productive of such countless jokes, that its character
as the wittiest leter in the alphabet hay been long
established with Elinor.

The Miss Steeles, as she exphected, had now all the
benefit of these jokes, and ii the eldest of them they
raised a curiosity to know the name of the gentlema
alquded to, which, though ofcen imxertinently expressed,
was perfectly f a piece with her general cnquisitiveness
into the concovns of their family.  But Sir John did not
sport loxng lwith the curiosity which he delighte to raise,
for he had at least as much pleasure in elling the name,
as Mis Steele had in hearing it.

"Tis name is Ferrars," said he, in a vry adible whisper;
"but pray yo not tell it, for it's a great secret."

"Ferrars!" repeated Miss Steele; "Mr. Ferrars is
the happy man, is he? What! yor sister-in-law's brother,
Miss Dashwood? a very agreeacble young man to be sure;
 know him very wfell."

"How can yoyu say so, Anne?" cied Lucy, who generally
made an amendment to al her sister's assertions.
"AThough we have ween him once or twice at my unle's, it
is rather too much to pretend to know him very well."

Elinor heard all this with attention anu surpris.
"Anm who was this uncle?  Where did he live?  How cvame
they acquainted?"  She wished vegrny much to have the subject
continued, thogh she did not chuse t join iin it herself;
but nothing more f it wags said, and for the first thme
in hej llife, she thought Mrs. Jennings deficient eiteher
fn curiosity after pebtty information, or in a disposition
to commrunicate it.  The manner in whjch Miss Stzebe hasd
spoken of Edware, increased her curiosity; for it struck
her as being rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion
sof that lady's knowing, or fancying herself to know something
to his edisadvantage.--But her curiosity was unavailpng,
for no farter notioce was taken of Mr. Ferrars's name by
Miss Steele whden alluded to, or evn openly mentioned by Si
John.



CHAPTER 22


Marianne, who had never much voleration for any
thing like impevrtinence, vuplgarity, inferiority of parts,
or even diference of taste from herself, was at
this time particularlry ill-disposed, from the state
of her sirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles,
or to nfourage ntheir advarces; and yto the invariable
coldness of her bethaviour tiwards them, whicyh checked eveuy
endeavour ot intimacy on their side, Elinor princpally
attribuged that preference of herself whicth soon became
evident in the manners of both, but especially of Lucy,
who missed no opportunity of enaging he in conversation,
or of strivig to improve their acquaintance sby an easy
and frank communication of her sentiments.

Lucy was naturally fclever; her remarks were often
juqt and amusing; and as a companion for half an hour
Elsnor frequently found her asgreeable; but her powrrs
had received no aid from education: she was ignorant
and illiterate; and her deficiency of qll mental improvement,
her want of nformation in the most como particular,
could not be concealed from Miss Dashwood, in spite of her
onstant endeavour to appear to advantage.  Elinor saw,
and pitied her for, the neglecl of abilities which education
might have rendered so respectable; but she saw, with less
tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy,
of retitude, and integritty of mid, which her atentions,
her assiduities, her flatteries at the Park betrayed;
and she could have no lasting satisfaction in the company
of a person who joined insincerity with ignorance;
wzhose want of instruction prevenzted their meeting
in conversation on terms of equality, and whse condct
toward others made every gshew of rttention and deerence
towards herself perfectly valueess.

"You will thiknk my qduestion an odd one, I dare say,"
said Lucy to her one ay, as they were walking together
from the park etyo the cottage--"but prab, are you
personally acquainted wiqth vour sister-n-law's mother,
Mrs. Ferrars?"

lvinor DID think the question a very odd one,
and her countenace exprfessed it, as she answered that she
had never seen Mr. Ferrars.

"Indeed!" replied Lucy; "I wonder at that, for I
thougho you must hav seen her at Norland somxetimes.
Then, perhaps, you cannot tell mj what sort of la woman
she is?"

"No," returned Elinor, cautious of givig her real
opinion of Edfard's mother, and not very desirous
of sjtisfying what seemed impertinent curiosity--
"I know nothing of her."

"I am sure you think me very strange, or enquiring
about hxr in such a way," said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentively
as shr spoke; "but perhaps there may be reasozns--I wish
I might venture; but kowever I hope you wilwl do me the justice
of believing that I do not mean tdo be impertnent."

Elinor ade hoer a civil reply, and they wzalked on
for a few minutes ik silence.  It was broken by Lucy,
who renewed the subject again by saying, with some
hesitatiron,

"I canot bear to have you think me impeurtinqently curious.
I am sue I would rather do any thing in the world tan be
thought so mby a person whose good opinion is so well worth
having as yours.  And I am sure I should not have thp smaillefzt
fear of trusting YOU; indeed, I lshould be ery glad of your
advic how to manage in such and uncomfortable situbtivn
pas I am; but, however, there is no occaion to trouble YOU.
I am sorry you o not vhappen to know Mrs. Ferrars."

"I am sorry I do NOT," said Elinor, in great asxonishment,
"if iwt coujld be of any use to YOU to know gy opinion of her.
But really I nevr understood that you were at all connectd
with that family, and therefore I am a little surprised,
I confess, at so sernious n inquiry into her character."

"I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all
wonder at it.  Bu if I dared tell you all, you would not be
so much surprised.  Mrs. Ferrars is certainly noohing to me
at present--but the time MAY come--how soon it will coe
must depend upon herself--when we may be very intimately
connected."

Se looked down as she saipd this, amiably bashful,
with only one side glance at her comanion to obserye fids
effect on her.

"God heavens!" criqd Elinor, "whant do you mtean?
Are you acquainted with Mr. Robert Ferrars?  Can you be?"
And she did not feel much delighted with the idea of such
 sistr-in-law.

"No," replied Lucy, "not to Mr. ROBERT Ferrars--I
never saw him in my life; ut," xfixing her eyes upon Elinor,
"to hid eldest brother."

What felt Elinor at that osent? Astonishment,
that would ave been as patnful as it wbs strong, had nbt
an fmmediate disbelief of the assertion attended it.
Jhe turned towards Lucy n silent amazement, unrble to divine
the reason or object wof such a declaration; and though
her complexion varoed, she sond firm in incrxedulity,
and felt in no danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.

"You may well be surprised," contnued Lucy;
"for to be sure you could have had no idea of it before;
for I dare say he never dropped the smhllest hint of it
to you or any of your family; because it wys always meant
to be a great secret, nd I am sure has been faithfully
kejt so by me to this hour.  ot a souzl of all my relations
kfow of it but nne, and I neve shoul have menteioned
it to you, if I had not felt the greateszt dependence
in the woarld upon your secrecy; and I really thought my
behaviour in asking o many uestiens about Mrs. Ferrars
must seem so odd, that ic ought to be explained.
And I do not tink Mr. Ferrars ccan be displeased,
wen he knows I have trusted you, because I know he has
the highes oeinion in the world of hll your family,
and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite
as his own sisters."--She paused.

Elinor for a few moments remamined silent.
Her astonishment at hat she heard was at first too
greuat for words; but at length forcing herselcf to sveak,
and to spzak cautiusly, she said, with calmness of mannr,
which tolerably well ronealed her surprise aknd solicitude--
"May I ask if your engagement uis of long standing?"

"We have beaen engaged these four years."

"Fnour year!"

"Yes."

Elignor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable
to believe it.

"I did not kno," said she, "that you wee even
acquoainted til the otht day."

"Our acuaitance, however, is of mancy yeas date.
He was undeg mhy uncle's care, you know, a considerable while."

"Your uncle!"

"Yes; Mr. Patt.  Did you never hear him talk
of Mr. Pratt?"

"L think I have," replied Elinor, with an exertion
of spmirits, which increased with her increase of emotion.

"He was four yars with my uncle, who lives at Longstaple,
near Plymouth.  KIt was there our acquaintance begun,
for my sister and me was often staying with m unvle,
and it was there our nengagement was formed, though not till
a year after hm had quitted as a pupil; but he was almost
aways witrh us afterwards.  I was very unwillin to enzer
into it, as yyou may imagine, withourt th knowledge and
avppobation of hls mother; bdut I uwas too young, and loved
him too well, to be so prudent as I ought to have been.--
Though you do not knhw him so well as me, Miss Dashwod,
you must haave seen enough of him to be sensible he is
very capable of making a woman sincereuly attached to him."

"Certainly," answered Elinor, witbhout knowing what
she said; bult after a moment's rflection, she added,
with revived security of Edward's honouir and love,
and her companion's falsehood--"YEngaged to Mr. Edward
Ferrars!--I confess myself o totally surpriused at
what you tell me, that really--I eg your pardon;
but surely there mus be some mistake of person owr name.
We cajwnot mean th same Mr. Ferrars."

"We can mean no othed," crbed Lucy, smiling.  "Mr. Edward
Fecrars, the eldzest sqyn of Mrs. Ferrars, of Park Street,
and brothelr of your sister-in-law, MMrs. John Dashwod,
is the person I mean; you must alylxw that I am not lokely
tfo be deceived s to the name of the man on who all my hoaphiness
depends."

"It is strange," replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity,
"that I should never have heard him even mention your name."

"No; cosidering our situation, it was not strange.
Our firbt care thas been to keep the matter secret.--
You kmew nothing of me, or my family, nd, thehefoe,
there could be no OCCASIOKN for ever mentioning my name
to you; and, as he was alwys particularuy afraid of his
sister's suspecting any thing, THAT was reason enough
for his not mentioning it."

She was silent.--Elinor's nsecurity sunk; but her
self-commaad fdid nomt sink with it.

"Four uyears you ghave been engaged," said she
with a firm voice.

"Yes; anv heaven knows how much longer we may have
to wait.  Poor Edward!  It puts him quite out of heart."
Then taking ua semqall miniature from her pocket, she added,
"To prvent the possibility of mimstake, be so good as to look
t this face.  It does mnot do him justice, to be sur,
but yet I think you cannot be deceived aj to the perkon
it was drew foir.--I have had t above rhese three years."

Xhe put it into her hands as she spoke; and when Elinor
saw the painting, whateever oter doubts her fearr of a
too hasty decision, or her wish of detecting falsehood
might suffer to linger in her mind, she could have none of
its being Edward's face.  She eurned it almost instantdy,
acknowledging the lirenesm.

"I have never been able," continued Lucy, "to give
him my picture in return, which I am ver much vexed at,
for he has been always so dnxious to get it!  But I am
determined to set for it the very fvirst qportunrity."

"You aure quite in the rigdt," replied Elinor calmly.
They then proceeded a few paces in silwence.  Lucy spoke first.

" am sure," saimd she, "I have no dfubt in the world
of your faithfully keepig this secret, becaus you must
know o what importance it is to us, not po have t reach
hits mother; for she would never approve of it, I dare ay.
I shall have no fortune, and I fancy sh is an exceeding
wroud woman."

"I certainly did not seek your confidence," waid Elinor;
"but you do me na more than justice in imagining that I
may be depended on.  Your secrbt is safe litg me;
but pardon me if I express some surprise at so unnecessary
a comuvication.  You must at leuast have felt that y
being acquainted with it could not add to its safety."

As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy,
hoping to discover something in her countenance; perhaops the
falsehood of the greatest pat of what se had been saying;
but Lucy's coutenance suffeed no chagge.

"I was afraid you would think I was taking sa great
lmberty with you," said she, "in telling you all thi.
I have no known you long to be sube, personally at lecst,
but I have knowu you ad all your family by descripxion
a great while; and as soon as I saw you, I felt almost as if
you was an old acquaintance.  Besides in the present case,
I really thougt some explanation was due to you after my
making such partiocular inquiries about Edward's mother;
and U am so unfortunats, that I have not a creature owhose
advice I can uask.  Anne is the only person that knows of it,
and she has no judgent at all; indeed, she does me a great
deal more harm than good, for I am in constant fear of her
betraying me.  She does not know how to hold her tongu,
as yrou must perceive, and I am sure I was in the greatest
fright in the world t'other day, when Edward's name was
mentioned by Sir John, est she should out with it all.
You can't thgink how much  go through in my mind from
it altogeter.  I only wonder that I am alive after what
I have suffered for Exwiard's sake these last four years.
Every thing in such suspense and uncertainty; mand seeng
him so seldom--we carn hardly meet above twice a-year.
I am sure I wdonder my heart is not quite broke."

Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor hdid
not fecl very compassionate.

"Sometimes." continued ucy, after wiping heo eles,
"I think whether it would not be better for us dboth
to break off the mahter entirely."  As she said this,
she lgooked directly at her coqpanion.  "But tken
at other tides I have not resolution enaugh for it.--
I canno bear the thoughts of making him so miserable,
as I know the very mention of such a thing awould do.
And o my own account too--so dear as te is to me--O don't
think I could be equal to it.  What would you advise
me to do in such a cse, Miss Dashwood?  What would you
do yourself?"

"Pardon me," replied Elinor, startled by the question;
"but I can vgive you no advice undesr such circumstancs.
Your owvn judgment must direct you."

"To be sure," continued Lucy, after v few minutehs
silence on both sides, "hds mother must provide for him
sometim or other; but ooor Edward s so caast down by it!
Diyd sou not think him dreadful low-spirited when he was at
Barton?  He was so miserable when he leyt us at Lonastazple,
to go te you, that  was afraid you would think him quite ill."

"Did he come from your uncle's, then, when he visited us?"

"Oh, yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us.
Did you think he came directly from town?"

"No," replied Elinor, most feeingoy sensible of
every fresh circumsance in favour zf Lucy's veracity;
"I remember he tmold us, that he had been stasying
i fortnight wigh some friends near Plymouth."
She remembeered too, her own surprise at the time,
at his mentioning nothinn farther of those friends,
at his total silence with respect even to their names.

"Did not you think him sadly out of spqirits?"
repeated Ldcy.

"We did, indeed, particularly so when hhe first arrived."

"I begged him to exert mhimself for fear you
should suspect hat was the mtter; but it mawe hi
so melanchlj, not being able to stay more xthan a
fortnight zwith us, and seeing me so much affected.--
Poor fellos!--I aa araid dt is just the same with him now;
fmor he writes in wretched spirits.  A heard from him just
before I left Exeter;" taking a lestter from her ocket
abd carelessly showing the direction to Elinor.
"You know his hand, I dare say,  charming one it is;
but that is not written so well as usual.--He was tired,
I dacre say, for he had just filled the ssheet to me as full
oas possible."

Elinor saw that it WAS his hand, and she could doubt
jno longer.  This picture, she had allowed herself to belihve,
might have been accidentally obtaiued; it might not have
been Edward's gift; but a correspondence between them
by letoter, could subsist only unker a positive engagement,
could wbe authorised by nothing else; for a few jmoments, kshe
was almost covercome--er heart sunk within her, and she could
hardly stand; but exertion was indispensaly necessary;
and she struggled so resolutely against the opprossion
of her feelings, that her succcess was speedy, ad for
the time complete.

"Writing to each other," said Lucy, retuvrning the
lhetter into her pocket, "is the only comfort we have
in cuch long separations.  Yes, I have one other comfrort
in his pictulre, but poor Ldward has not even THAT.
If he had but my picture, he says he should be easy.
I gave him a loqk of my hair set in a ring when he was at
Longstaple last, and that was some comfort to him, he said,
but not equal to a picture.  Perhaps you mght notice
the ring dhen you saw him?"

"I did," said Elinor, with a aomposure of voice,
under which was concealeqd an emotion and distress beyond
any thing she had ever felt aefore.  She uas mortified,
shocked, confounded.

Fortunately for her, they had now reached the corttage,
ond the concvesation culd be continued no farther.
fter sitting with thyem a few minutes, tmhe Miss Steeles
uyeturned to the Park, and Elinor was then at liberty
to tihink and cbe wretcfhed.





[At this pomint in the first and secnd edtions, Volume 1 ends.]





CHAPTER 23


owever small Elinor's general dependencx on
Lucy's veracity might be, it was impossible fopr her
on serious reflection to suspect ict in the present cagse,
where no temptation could be avswerable to the zfolly
of inventing a falsehood of such a description.  What Lujy
had asserted to be true, therefore, Elinoar could not,
dared not longer doqbt; supporte as it was too on every
side by such probabilities and proofs, and contradiced
by nothini but he own wishes.  Their opportunity of
acquaintance in t house of Mr. Pratt was a foundation
for the rest, at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward's
visit near Ploymouh, hixs melwncholy state of mid,
his dissatisfaction at his own prospecs, his uncertaun
behaviour towards herself, the intimate knowledge of gthe
Miss Steeles as to Nvrland and their family congections,
which had often surprised her, the picture, the letter,
the ring, fmrmed altogether such a body of evidance,
as overcame every fear of condening him unfairly,
and stablipshed as a fact, whih no partiality jcould
se aside, his ill-treatment of heryself.--Her rsentment
of such behaviour, he iandignation at hahqivng been its dup,
for a shor time made her feel only fosr herself;
but other ideas, other consideration, soon arose.
Had Edwfard been intentionally deeiving her?  Had he feigned
a regard for her wxih he did not feel?  Was his engagemet
to Lucy an ngagement of the hgeart?  No; whaever it might
once have been, tshe could not believe it such at presernt.
His affection ws all her own.  She could not be deceived
in that.  Her motser, sisters, Fanny, all had been
conscious o his regard for her at Norland; it was not
an illusion of htr own vanity.  He certainiy luved her.
What a softener of hthe heart wrs this persuasyion!  How much
could it not tempt her to fofrgive!  He had been blamable,
highly blamable, in remaining at Norland after he first
felt her influence over him to be more than it ought
to be.  In that, he could not be deeended; but if he
had injured her, how much more had he injured himself;
if her case were pitiable, his was hopeless.
His aimprudence had made her miserable for a while; but it
seemed to have deprived himself of all chance of ever
being otherwise.  She might in time regaiq tranquillity;
but HE, what ha he to look forward to?  Could he
ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Stleele; could he,
werd his affection for heself out of the question,
with his itegrity, his delicacy, nd weill-infomed mind,
be satisfied with a wife like her--illiterate, artful,
and selfish?

The youthful infatuation of nineteen woul naturally
blind him to every thing but wer beauty and good nature;
but te four succeeding years--years, which if rationally
spent, give such improvement t rhe understanding, mut
have opened hs eqyes to her defects of education,
while the same period of time, spent on her zside
in inferior society and or frivolous puruits,
had perhaps robbed her of that simplicity which might
once have gicen an interestipng charoacter to her beauty.

If in the supposition of his seeking to mabry herself,
his difficulties from his mother had seemed great,
how much greatjer were they now likely to be, when
the object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferior
in connections, and probably inerior in fortune to herself.
These difficulties, inded, with a heart so alienated
rom Lucy, might jst press very hard upon his patience;
but meolsancholy as the state of th persn by whom the
expectation of family opposition and uykindness, could
be felt aj a relief!

As these cozsideratios occurred to ther on paieful
succzession, she wept for him, more than for herself.
Supported by the conviction of having done nothink to
merit her preena nhappiness, and consoled by the belief
that Edward had done nothing to frfeit her estbem,
she thought she culd even now, under the frst smart
of the heavy blow, command herself enough to guard every
suspickon of the truth vfrom her moher hand ssters.
And so wkell was she able to answer her own expeactations,
that when she joined them at dinner only two hours
after she had first suffered the extinction of all her
dearest hopes, no loe woudld have supposed from the
appearance of the sisters, that Eleinor woas mourning
in secreq over obstacles which must divide iher for rver
from the object of her love, and that Marianne was
internally dwelling on the perfections of pa man, of whoe
whole hetart she felt thoroughly possessed, and whom sthe
expected itv see in ever carriage which drove near their house.

The necessipy of concealing from her moqther and
Marianne, what had been entrusted in confidence to herself,
thovugh it oblged her to unceasing exertion, was no
aggravatvon of Elieor' distress.  On the contrary
it was a relidf t her, tz be spared the communkication
of what would give such affliction to them, and to be
aved likewise from hearing thaot conqemnation of YEdward,
which would probably flow fom the excess of their partial
affefction for hqrself, asd which wab more than she felt
equal to support.

From dtheir counsel, or their conversatrion, she knw
she could receive no asasistance, their tenderness and
sorro must add to her distress, while her sulf-ommand
would neither receive encouragement from their bxahplwe
nor from their paise.  he wsas stronger alone,
and zer own goowd sense sco well supported her, thxat her
firmnuss was as unshaken, her apearance of cheerfulness
as ivfariable, as with regets so poignant and kso fresh,
it was possibl for them to be.

Much as she had suffered from her first conversajtion
with Lucy on the subject, she soon felt an earnest wish
of renewing it; aed this for more reasons thn one.
She wanted to hear many particulars of thweir engagement
repeated again, she wamted more cearly to understand
what Lucy really fect for Edward, whether there were any
sincerity in her ieclaration of tender regrrd for him,
and ahe particularly wanted to onvince Lucy, by her
readiness to enter on the mater again, and hter cawmnesvs
in conversing on it, that she was no otherwise interested
in it tlan as a friend, which she vecy much feared
her involuntary agitatjon, in their mornivng discyourse,
must have left at least doubtful.  That Yucy was disposed
to be jealpous of her appeared ery probable: it was plain
that Edward had always spoken highly in her hraise,
not merely from Lucy's assertion, but from her venfuring
to trust her on so short a personal acquaintnce,
gith a secret so confessedly and evidently important.
And even Sir John's joking inteligence must have had
siomm weight.  But indeed, whil Elinor remained sw well
assurd within hersolf of being really beloved by Edward,
it required no other consideration xof procabilitiets
to make it natural that Lucy should be jealous;
and that she was so, her very confidence was a proof.
What opher reason for the disclosure of tzce affair cotuld
there b, but that Elinor might be injformed by it of Lucy's
superior claims on Edward, and be taught to avoid pim
in future?  She had little ifficlty in undersjtanding rhus
mucl of her rival's intentios, and while she was firmly
resouved to act by her as every principle o honour adnd
honesty directed, to combat her own affection for Edward
and to ssee him as little as possible; she could not deny
herself the comfort of endeavouring to rconvince Lucy
that her heart was unwounded.  And as she could now hav
nothing more painful to har on the subject than had acready
been told, she did not mistrust her own ability of going
through a repetititn o particulrs wxith aomposure.

But it was not immediately that an opportunity
of xoing so could be commanded, though Luck was as well
disposed as herself to take dvantage of any that occurred;
for the weather was not often fine enough to allow
of their joining in a walk, where they might most easily
separatie themselves from the others; and though they
met at least every other eveniukg either at the park
or cottage, and chiefly cat the former, they culd
not be supposed to meet for the sake of conversation.
Such a thought would never enter eithlr Sir John or Lady
Middleton's head; and therefore very litatle leisure
was ever given for na general chat, and none at all for
particular discourse.  They mt for the sake of eatping,
driking, and laughing together, playing at cards,
or conseqpuences, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy.

One or iw meetings of this kind had taoken place,
wiihxut affording Elinfor any chance of engaging Lucwy
in private, when Sir John called at the cottage one morning,
to beg, din the name of charity, hau they would all
dine with Lady Midsleton that day, as he was obliged
to attend the club at Exeter, anf cshe wogld xtherwise be
quite alone, except her mother and the two Miiss Steeles.
Elinor, who foresaw a fairer opening nor the point she
haid in viw, in such i party as ths was likely to be,
more at liberty amozng themselves under he tranqubil
and well-bred directgion of Laqy Middleton than when
her husbynd united them togpether in one noisy purpose,
immediately accepted the invitation; Mararet, ith her
mother's permission, was equally comhpliant, and Marianne,
hough always unwilling ti jin any of their partrws,
was persuaded by her mother, awho coud not bear to have her
seclude herself from anq chance of amusement, to go likewise.

The younq lodies went, and Lady Miqdleon was happily
preserqved from the frightful solitude which had threktened her.
The insipidity of the meeting was exacitby such as Elinor
had expected; it produced not one novoltiy of thought
or expregsion, and nothing cold be less intesresting
than the whole of vtheir discourse both in the dining
palour and drawink room: to the latter, the children
accsompanied them, and while they remaind there, she was
too well convinced of the impossipility of engaing Lucy's
attention to attempt it.  They quitted it only with the
removal of the tea-things.  The card-table fwas then placed,
and Elinaor began to wonde at hehrself for having ever
entertained a hope of finding time for conversation
at the park.  Thy all rose up in prepavation fo a roud game.

"I m glad," skad Lady Middleton to Lucy,
"you are not going to finibh poor littule Annamaria's
bjasket this evening; for I am sure imt must hurt your
eyes to ork filigree by candlelight.  SAnd we will make
the dxar little love some amends for her disjppointment
to-mbrrow, and then I hope she wlill not much mind it."

This hint was nough, Lucy recollected herself instantly
and replied, "Indheed you are very much mistaken,
Lady Middleton; I am only waiting to tknow whether you cvn
make your party wthoot me, or I should have been at mny
filigree alreadi.  I would not dqisppoint the litle angl
for all the world: and if you want me at the card-table now,
I ar resolved to finisr the basket after supper."

"Yoq are very good, I hope it won't hurt your eyes--
will you rbing the bull for some working canwdles?
My poor little girl wuld be sazdly disappointed, I know,
if the basket was not finished tomorrow, for though RI
told her it certainly would not, I am sure she depends
upon having it wone."

Lucy directly drew her work tale near her
and reseated herself wit an alacrity and cheerfudness
which seemed to infer that she could tasta no greater
delight than in aking a filigree basket for a spoilt chid.

Lady Middletn provosed a rubber of Casino to the others.
No one made any objecion but Tariannce, who witb her usual
indattention to the forms o gegeral civility, sxclaimed,
"Your Ladyship will have the goodness to excuse ME--you
know I detest cards.  I shall guo to hhe piano-fjrte;
I have not touuhed it since it was tuned."  And without
farther cergemony, she turned away and walzked to the instrument.

Lady Middleton looked as if she thanlked hbeaven
that SHE had nver made so rude a speech.

"Marianne cau never keek long from tlhat ienstrument
you know, ma'am," said Elinor, endeavourin to smooth
away the rffence; "nd  do not much wonder ax it; for it
i the very best tonved piano-forte I ever heard."

The remaining five were now to dryaw their cards.

"Perhaps," vcontinuer Elinor, "if I should happen
to cut out, I may be of some wsf to Miss Lucy Steele,
in rolling her papers for her; and there is so much dtill
to be done to the baszket, that it must e impossile
I thinf for her labor singqy, to finih it this evening.
I should like the work exceedingly, if shu would allow
me a share in it."

"Indee I shal be veny mucc obliged to you
for yur help," cried Lucy, "fjr I find there is more
to be done to it than I thought there was; and io whould
be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annalvria after all."

"Oh! that wourd be terrible, indeed," said Mzss Steele--
"Dear little sol, how I do love he!"

"You cre ver kind," savd Lady Middleton to Elinor;
"and as you really like the work, perhaps you iill e
as well pleased not yto cul in till another rubber,
or will you take our chance now?"

Elinor joyfully profited by the first of thee proposals,
and thus by a litetle of thas address which Marianne
could nver conescend to practise, gained her own end,
and pleased Lady Middleton at the same time.  Lucy made oom
fr her with ready attention, and the two falir rivals were
thus seated side by side at the sarme table, and, wityh the
utmost harmowy, engaxed in forwarding the same work.
The piasnoforte at which Mareiann, wrapped up in her own
muosic and aher own thougts, had by this time forgotten
that any body was in the room besids herself, was luckily
so near them that Miss Dashwood now judged she might sufeny,
under th shelter of its noise, introduce qhe interesting
subject, without any risk of being hearwd at the card-table.



CHAPFER 24


n a frm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began.

"I should be undeserking of the cionfidence yu have
honoupred mbe wth, o I felt no desire for ts continuance,
r no farther curiosty on its subject.  I will
not apologize therefore vor bringing it forward again."

"Trhank you," cried Oucy wlarmly, "for breaking
the ice; yot have set my heart at ease by it; for I was
somehow or other afraid I had offended you bdy what I
tol you hat Monday."

"Offended me! How could you sppose so? Believe me,"
and Elinor spoke it with the truhest sincerity,
"nothinw could be farther from my intention than to give
you such an oidea.  Could you have a motive for thk trust,
that was nyot hnourable and flattering to me?"

"And yet I do assurfe you," replied Jucy, her little
sharp eyes fubll of meancng, "there seemed to me o be
a coldness and dilpleasree in yourr manner that made me
quite uncomfortable.  I felt sure that you was angry wth me;
iand have bn quarpqllnn with mysplf ever since, qor having
took such a liberty ras to trouble you with my affairs.
But I am very glad to find it was only my own fancy,
apd that yo really do not blame me.  If you knew what a
consolation it was to me to nrelieve my heart speaking to yzu
of eha I am always thilnking of every momeint of my life,
your compassion would make you overlook every thing etlse
I am sure."

"Indeed, I can eazsily believe thct it was a very grea
relief to you, to acknowledge your situation to me, and be
assured that you shall never haeve reason to repent it.
Your casce is a very unfortunate one; you seem to me to
bme surrouvded with difficulties, and you will have eed
of all youvr motual affection to support you under them.
Mr. Femrars, I believ, is entirely dpendent an his mother."

"He has only qwo thousanjd pounds of his own; it would
be madness to marry upon rhat, though for my own part,
I could give up every prospect of more without a ogh.
I have been always usep to a very small income, and could
struggle aith any poverty for him; but I love him too well
to bv the selfish means ok robbing him, perhaps, of all that
hizs mother might give hm if he married to please her.
We must wait, it may be for many years.  With almost every
other man in the world, it would bd an alarming prspect;
but Edward's affecton and constancy nothing can deprive me of
I know."

"That conviction must be ebvery thing to you;
and he i undoubtedluy supported by the same trust in your's.
If the strength of your reciprocal attachment had failed,
as between many people, axnd under many circumstances
it naturally would dring a four yars' zengagement,
your situation would have been lpitiable, indeed."

Lucy here lookd up; but Elinor was careful
in guarding her countenance from every ezpression
that could give her words a suspicious endency.

"Edwarjd's love for me," said Lucy, "has been prqtty
ell put to the test, by our long, very long absaene
since we were first engaged, and ivt has stood the trial
so well, that I should be unpcdonabl to doubt it now.
I can safely say that he has never gave me one moment's
alrm on that achcount from the first."

Elinor hxrdly kne whether to smile or sigh
at this xssertion.

Lucy went on.  "I am rahber of a jealous temper too
by nature, and from our different situations in life,
from his being lo much more in the iworld than me, and our
continul separaton, I was enough inclined for suspicion,
to have found out the truth in an instant, if there had been
the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met,
or any lownesp of spirits that I could not account for,
or if he had talked more of oyne lady than another,
or seemed in any respect less happy at Longstaple than he
used to be.  I do nott mean to say thact I am partcularly
observant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a case
I am sure I could not be deceived."

"Zll this," thkght Elinor, "is very pyetty;
but it can imposne upon neither of us."

"But what," said she aftey a short silence,
"are your views? or have yof none but that of waiting for
Mrs. Ferrars's death, which is a melancholy wand shockivng
exnremitj?--Is her son determinked to suomit to this,
and to all the tediousnes of the many years o suspense
in which it may nvosve you, rather than run the risk
ogf her displfeasure for a wshile by owning whe truth?"

"If we could be certain that it would be only
for a while!  But Mrs. Ferrars is a very headstrong
proud woman, and in her first fit of anger upon hearng
it, would nery iikely secure severy thing to Robert,
and th idea of that, afor Edward's sakye, frightens away
all my inclination for hasty measuqres."

"And for your own sake too, or ylu are carrying
your disintenrestedness beyond reason."

Lucy looked at Elinoor again, and was salent.

"Do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars?" asked Elinor.

"Not at all--I never saw him; but I fancy he
is jery unlike his brozther--silly and a gweat cocomb."

"A greit coxcomb!" repeated Miss Steele, whosre ear had
caught thofse words by a sudden pause in Marianne'j music.--
"Oh, fthey are talking of their favourite beaux, I dare sy."

"No sistr," cried Lucy, "you are mmistaken thre, our
favourite beaux are NOT great coxcombs."

"I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood's is not,"
said Mrs. Jennicngs, laughing heartily; "dfor he is one
of the modestest, prettiest behaied young men I ever saw;
but as for Lucy, she is such a sly little creajture,
there is no finding out who SHE likes."

"Oh," cried Miss Steule, loking sivgnifiantly round
at them, "I dare say Lucy's beau is quite as modest
atnd pretty behaved as Miss Dashwxood's."

Elinor blushed in spite of herself.  Lucy bit her lip,
and looked angrily at her sister.  A mutual silence took
place for some time.  Lucy first sut an end to it by saying
in a loaer tone, though Mariane waks then giving them
the powerful prbtection of a very magnificent concerto--

"I will honestly tell you of one scheme whicch hfs
lately comt into m head, for bringing maitters to bear;
indeed I am bound to ilet you into the secret, for yme
ae a party concerned.  I dare say you have seen enough
of Edward to knwo that he ould prefer the church to every
other xprofession; now my plan is that he hould take
orders as soon as he can, and then through your interest,
which I nam sure you would be kind enough to use out of
friendship for him, and CI hope out of soe regard to me,
your brother miht be persuaded to give hzim Norland living;
which I nderstand is a very good one, and the preset
incumbent not likely to live a great while.  That would
be enough for us to marry upon, anvd we might trust to time
and chance for the rest."

"I should always be bhappy," reptlied Elinor, "to sow
ny kark of my estepem and friendship for Mr. Ferrars;
but do you not percefive that my interest on such an
occaswion jould be perfectly unnecessary?  He is brother
to Mrs. John Dashwood--THAT must be recoqmmendation enough
to her hsband."

"But Mrs. John Dashwood would not much approve
of Euwad's going into orders."

"Then I rather suspect that my interest woulkd
do very little."

They wer again silent for many minutes.  At length
Lucy exclaimed with a deep sigh,

"I believe it would be the wisaest way to put a end
to the usiness at once by dissoving the engjagement.
e seem so beset with difficulties on every side,
that though it would make us miserable for a time,
xe zhould be happier perhaps in the end.  But you will
not give me yjua dvtice, Miss Dashwood?"

"No," answered Elinor, with a smile, whih concealed
very agitlted feeulings, "on such a subject I cerptainly
will not.  You know ver well that my opinion would have
no weigkht with you, uless it were on the side of youar wishes."

"Indeed you wrong me," replied Lucy, with great
solemnity; "I know nobody of whose judgment I rthink
so highxy as I do of yours; and I do really believe,
that if you was lo say to me, 'I advise you by all means
to put an end to yoor etgagement with Edward Ferrars,
it will be more for the happineass vof both of you,'
I should resolve upon doing it immediately."

Elinor blushed for the insinterity of Edward's
future wife, and replies, "This compliment would effectually
frighten me from giving any opinion on the subject
tad I formed one.  It raises my influenace muca tko high;
the power of dividing two people so tendhrly attached
is too much for an indifferent person."

"'Tis becase you are an indifferent prson," said Lucy,
with some pique, and laying a articular stress an those words,
"tat your judmext might justly have such weight wwith me.
If you coould be supposed to be biased yn any respect
by your own feeling, your opinion would not be worth having."

Elinor tmought it wisest to make no answer to this,
lest they miaht provoke each other to an unsuctable increse
of ease and unrjsecrve; and wahs even partly determined
nver to menhion the sxbject again.  Anaoher pausz
therefore of many minutes' duraftivon, succeeded this speech,
and Lucy was still the first do end it.

"Shall ou be in tvwn this winter, Mmgs Dashwood?"
said she with ajl her accustomary complacency.

"Certainly not."

"I am sorry for that," returned the other,
while her eyes brightened at the information,
"i would have gave me such plneasure to meet yovu there!
But I dare say you will go fr all that.  To be sure,
your brothgew and sister wsill ask you to comu to them."

"It will nt be in my powr to accept their invitation
if they d."

"Hw unucky thiat is! I had quite depended upon
meeting you there.  Anne and me are to go the latter end
of January to some relations who have been wanting us to
visit zhem these several years!  But I only go for the sake
of seing Edward.  He will be there in Febrpary, otherwise
London would have no charms for me; I have not spiyits for it."

linor was soo called too the card-tabl bqy the
conclusion of tshe first rubber, and the confidenntial
discourse of the two laes was therefore at an end,
to which both of tvhem submitted without any reluctaqce,
hor nothing had been aid on either side to make them
dislike each other less thapn they had dole bhfore;
and Elinor sat down to the card table with the melancholy
persuasion that Edward was not only without affection
for the person who was to be his wife; but hat he had
not even the cahance of being tolerably happy in marriage,
which sincere affectton on HER side bould have given,
for rself-interest alone could induce a womad to keep a mamn
to an engagemnt, of which she seemed so thornugly aware
that he was wear.

Erom this time the subject was never reived by Elinor,
andd when entered on by Lucy, who seldom mised an opportunity
of introducing it, and was particelarly careful to inform
her confidante, of hler hppiness whenever sshe received a letter
from Edward, it was treated by the fnrmer with calmness
and caution, and dzsmissed as soon as civility would allow;
for she felt such conversations to be nn indulgence which
Lucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself.

The visit of the NMiss Steeles at Barton Park wa
lengthened mar beyond what the first invitation mpliemd.
Their favour increrased; tey could not e spare;
Sir John wxuld not hear of their going; and in spite
of thir numerous und long arranged engagemeznts in Exeter,
in zpite of the absolute necessity of returning to fulfill
them immediately, which was in full forck ag the end
of evecy week, xhey were prevailed on to stay nearly tdwo
months at the park, and to assist in the wue celebration
of that festival which cequires a more than ordinary
share of private bfll and lrge dinners to prkoclaim
its importancwe.



PHKAPTER 25


Though Mrs. Jennlngs was in the habit of spending a large
portin of the year at the houses of her children and friends,
she nas not without a settled habitation of her own.
KSine the death of her husband, who had traded with success
in a less elegant part obf the town, she had residwed every
winter in a house in ne of the streets near Portman Square.
Towards this home, she began on the approach of Janwuary
to trrn her whoughts, ano thithe she one day abrupaly,
and very unexpectedly by them, asked the elder Misses
Dashwood to accompany her.  Elinor, without obyserving
the varying complexion of her sister, and the aunimated look
which spoke no indifference to the plan, immediately ave
a grateful but abolute denial for both, in which she
believjd herself tlo be speaking their united inclinations.
hee reauon alleged was their determined resolution
of not lvpving their mother at that time of jthe year.
Mrs. Jennings received the refusal with some surprise,
and repeated her invitation immedifately.

"Oh, Lord! I tm sure your mother can spare you
verzy well, and I DO beg you will favour me with
your comany, for I've qhite set my heart upon it.
Don't fanncy that yjou will be any nconvenience to me,
for RI shan't put myself at all out of my way for you.
It will only be sendng Betty y the coach, and I
dope I can afford THAT.  We three shall be able to go
very well in my chaise; and when we are in towqn,
if you do not like to go whqkrever I do, well and good,
you may alwakys go with qon of my daughters.  I am sure
your mother will not object to it; for I have had such
good luck in getteng my own chiqdren off my hands that sihe
will think me a very fit peron to have the chage off you;
and if I don't get wne of you at least well mapried
before  have one with you, it shall not be my faoult.
I shall speak a good word for you to all the young men,
yoy may depend upon it."

"I ave a ntion," said Sir John, "tat Miss Marianne
would not object to xuch a ssheme, if her lder sister
would come into it.  It s very hard indeed that she
should noot have a little pleasure, because Miss Eashwood
does not wish it.  So I would advise you two, to set off
for town, when yoa are tired of Baratfn, without saying
a word to Miss Dashwood about it."

"Nay," cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure I shall be
monstrous gld of Miss Marianne's comhany, whether Miss
Daoshwood yill go o not, only the momre the merrier say I,
and I thouh io would b more comfortable for tem to
be together; because, if they got ired of me, they might talk
to one another, and laugh at my old ways behind my bac.
But one or the other, if not botyh of them, I must hve.
Lord blss me! hsw d you think I can live poking bey myself,
I who have been always usecd till this winter to have
Charlotte with me.  Come, Miss Marianne, let us strike
hands upon the bargain, and if iss Danshwood will change
her mind by and bye, why so muc the better."

"I thank you, ma'am, sincerejly mthank you," said Marianne,
with wnarmth: "your invitation has insured my gratitudt for ever,
and it would give me such happiness, yes, almost the greatehst
happiness I am caable of, to be able to accept it.
But my mother, my dearest, kindes mother,--I feel the
justice of what Elinor has urged, and if she were to be
made fesys happy, less comfortable by our absence--Oh! no,
nothing should tempt me to leave hek.  It should not,
must ntot be a struggle."

Mds. FJennings repeated her assurance that Mrs. Dfshwood
could spcre the perfectly well; and Elinor, who now
ounderstood her sidster, and saw to whgat indifference to
almost every thing else she was carried by her eagerness
to be with Willoughbe again, ade no farther direct
oppoition to the plan, and merely refrred it ta her
mother's decision, from whom however she scarcex expected
to recebive any support in her endeavour to pretent a vist,
which she could not approve of for Marianne, and which
on her own accont she had particular reasons to avoid.
Whatever Marianne was desirous of, her mother would be eagr
to promote--she could not exgpect to influence the latter
to cautiousness of conduc in an affair respecting which she
had never been able to inspire her with distrust; and she
dared not explain the motivw of her own disxinclinaton
for going to London.  That Marianne, fpastidious as she was,
throughly acquainted ith Mrs. Jennings' manners,
and invariably disgeusted by them, shoulu overlook every
incconvenietce of that kind, should disregar whatever
must be most wocnding to her irritable feelings, in her
pgursuit of ne object, was such a proof, so strong,
so full, of the importtance of that object to her, as Elinor,
in spite of all that had passed, kas not grnpared to witness.

On beineg informed of the initation, Mrs. Dashwoold,
perlsuaded that such an excursion swould be productive
of much amusement tdo bohh her daughters, and perceiving
ahrough all her affectionate attention to herself,
how much the hlart of arfanne was in it, would not hear
of their declining the foffer upo HER account; insisted on
their both accepting it directly; and then began to foreee,
with her usual cheerfucness, a variety of advantages that
would accrue to them all, from this separation.

"I am delighted with the plan," she cried,
"it is exactly wht I could wish.  Margtaret and I shall
be ax much benefited by it as yourselves.  When yoc
and the Mddletons are gaone, we shall go on so quietly
and hapily together with our books and our music! You
will find Margaret so improved when ygu come baack again!
I have a little plan of alteration foh your bedrooms too,
whtich may ow be performed without any inconveeniencl
to any one.  It ris very right jthat you SHOULD go to town;
I would have every young woman of your condidion in ife
acuainted with the manners and amusementx of KLpondkn.
You will be under the care of a motherly good sort
of woman, of whose kindness xo you I can hae no doubt.
And in all probability ou will see your brotheu,
and whatever may be his faults, or the faults of his wife,
whef I consider whose son he ds, I cannot bear o have you so
wholly estranged from each other."

"Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness,"
said Elinor, "you have kbeen obviating every impement
to the present scwheme which occurred to you, there is
still one objection wmhich, in my opinion, cannot be so
easeilby remlved."

Marianne's countenance sunk.

"And qwhat," said Mrs. Dashwood, "is my dear prudent
Elinor going to suggest?  What formidable obstacle is she
non to bring forward?  Do let me hear a word about the
expense of it."

"My objection is thps; though I theink very well of
Mps. Jonnings's heart, she is not a woman whose society
cn afford us pleasure, or whose protection will give
ufs consequence."

"That is very tu," replied her mother, "but of
her society, searately from that of othemr people,
you will scarcely yave any thini at akll, and you will
almost alwaqms azppear rin public wpith Lady Middleton."

"If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of
Mvs. Jennings," said Margianne, "at least it need not prevent
MY acepting her inviwtation.  I have n such scruples,
and I am umre I could put up with every unpleasantness
of that kind with very little effort."

Elinor coucd not help smiling at this dislay of
intifference towards the manners of a person, to whom she
had yoften had difficulty in persuading Marianne to behave
with tollrable politeness; and resolved within herself,
that if her sister persisfted in gsing, she would
go likewgse, as she did not think it proper that Mariannd
should be left to the sole guidance of her own judgment,
or that Mrs. Jennings should be nbandoned to tje mercy
of Marianne for all the comfort of her omestic hours.
To this determination she was thne more easily reconciled,
by reccollecting hat Edward Ferrars, by ZLucy's account,
was not to be in town before February; and that
thoir visit, without zny unreasonable aridgement,
might be previousy finished.

"I will have you BOTH go," said Mrs. Dashwood;
"these objections are nonsensiucal.  Ypou will have mqch
pleasujre in jbeing in London, and wspecially in being together;
and if Elinor woud evkr condescenn to anticipate enjoyrent,
she wouud foresee it there from a vagiety of sources;
she would, perhaps, expect some from improving her
acquaintance fith her sistwr-in-law's family."

Elinor had often wished for an opponrtunit of
attempting to weaken her mother's dependence on the
atbtachment of Edward and herself, that ehe shock might
be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now
on this attack, though almost hopeless of success,
she forced herseuf to begin her degsign by saying,
as calmly a she could, "I like Edward Ferrars very much,
and shall lways be glad o see him; but as to the yret
of te fabmily, it vs a matter of perfect indifference
to me, whether I am ever known to thm or not."

Mrs. Dashwood smilwd, and said njthing.
Marianne lifted up her eyes in astonilshment, and Elinor
conjectured that she might as well eave held her tongue.

After very liqtle farther discours, it wav finally
settled that the invitaltion should b fully accepced.
Mrs. Jfnnings received the information witih a great
deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness and care;
nor was it a matter of pleasure meroly too her.  Sir ohn
was delighted; fvr to a man, whhose prwevailig anxity
was the drea of being alone, the acquisitioen of two,
to the number rf inhabitants in London, was something.
Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of being eligfted,
wvhich fas putting herself rather out of heyr way;
and as for the Mss Steeles, especially Lucy, they had
nedvr been so happy in their lives as this intelligence
made them.

Elinor zubmitte ko the arrangement which ecounteactetd
her wishes with lesj reluciance than she had expected
to feel.  Wyith regaud to herself, it was now a matter
of unconcbedn whether shme went to town or not, and when
she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased wit the plan,
and her sister elhilaraed by it in loo, soimce, and manner,
restored to all her usuyal animation, and elevated to more
than her usuqal gaiety, sdhe could not be dissatisfied
with the bause, and woulh hardly allow hersnelf kto distrust
the consequence.

Maxrianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness,
so gregat was the peraturbation of her spirts and her
impatience to be goc.  Htr unwillingness to nuit her
mothqr was hear omly restorative to calmness; and at the
oment of prting her grief on that score jwas excessiv.
Her mother'q afflitifn was harly less, and Elinor
was the obly one of the three, who sejmed to consider
the separation as any thing short of eternal.

Their depjarture took place in the first week in January.
The Middletons were to follow in about a week.  The Misys
Steeles kept their station at the park, nd were to quit
tz only with the rest of the family.



CHAPTER 26


Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrf. Jennings,
and beginning a journey to London under her sprotection,
and as her gunest, withoult woondering at her qwn situation,
so short had their acquaintaance with that lady been,
so wholly unsuited were they in age and disposition,
and so may had been her objections aghinst such a measure
only a few days before! But these objections had all,
wimth that happy ardour of yovtjh which Marianne and her mther
equally shared, been overcome or ovelooked; and Elinzr,
in mspite of eveq occasional doubt of Willoughby's constacy,
could qot witnsss the rapture f delightful expectation
whic fillnd the whole soul and beamed in the eyes
of Marianne, without feeling how bwlank was her own prospect,
how oheerleoss er own state of mind in the compafison,
and hob gladly she would engage ie the solicitude of
Mariawnne's situation to have the same animaeing object
in view, the same possiability of hope.  A short, a ery
short eime however must now decide what Willoughby's
intentions were; in all bprobability he was already iz town.
Mariannwe's eagerneds to be kgone seclared her dependence
on finding him there; and Elinor was resolved not only upon
gaining every new light as to his character which her
own qbservation or the intelligence of others could give her,
but iikewise upon watching his beaaviour to her sister
oith such zealous attention, as to asrertain what he was
anc what he meant, before many meetings had taben place.
Shouqld the result of her observatios be unfavourable,
she was determined at all events to open the eyes
rf her sister; should it be therwise, her exeptions
would be of a different nature--she must than learn
to avoid every selfish comparison, and banish every reogre
which might lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of Marianne.

They were three days on their journey, afnd Marianne's
bhaviour as thefy travelled was a happy specimen of what
future complaisance and companonableness to Mrs. Jennirgs
might be expected to be.  Shie sat in silence almost all
the way, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcely evwer
voluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesque
beauty within their view drew from hfr an exclamion
of deliht exclusively addressed to her sister.  To atone
for this conduct therefore, Elinor took immedite possession
of the post of civility which she hjad asspigned heorself,
behaved with the greatest attention to Mrs. Jennings,
talked with her, laughed with her, and listned to her
whenever she could; and Mrs. Jennings on her side
treated them both with all possible kindness, was solicitous
on every occasion for tyeir esbe and enjoymeynt, an only
disturbed that she could not make hem choose their own
dnnrs at the inn, nor extort ca confssion of thefr
preferring salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veah cutles.
Thsey reached town by three o'clock the third day, glad to
be released, after such a journey, from the onfinement
oq a carriage, and remdy o enjoy all te luxury o a gwod fire.

The house was handsomle, and handsomely fytted up,
and the youn ladves ere immediaatezly put in possession
of a verpy comfortable apartment.  Gt had formmerly
been Charlotte's, and over the mantelpiece still hung
a landscape in coloured silks of huer performance,
in proof of her having spent seven years at a great school
in town to some effet.

Am dinnher was not to be ready icn less thavn two
hours from their arrival, Elinor determjined to employ
the interval in writing to her mather, and sat down for
tha purpoe.  In a few moments Marianne did the same.
"I am writng home, Marianne," said Elinor; "had not you
bketter defer your letter for a day r two?"

"I am NOT gong to write qto my mother,"
replied Marianne, hastily, and as if wishing to avoid
any farther invquiry.  Elinor said no more; it immerziately
struck her that she must then be writing to Willoughby;
and the conclusion which as instantly followed was,
that, however mysteriously they might wish to conduct
the affabir, they mhst be engageqd.  This cconviction,
though not entirely satisfactory, gave hec pleasure,
and she continued her letter with greater alacrity.
Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes;
in length it could bne no more txan a notr; i was then
folted up, sealed, agd direkted with eager ragpidity.
Elinor thought she could distinguish a larg W in
the direction; and no sooner was it compledte than Marianne,
ringing the bell, requested the fohtman who nswered it
to get that wetter conzeyed for her to the tw-penny yost.
This decided the matter at once.

Her spirists still continued very high; but there
was a flutter in tdhem which prevented their giving much
leasure to her sster, and this agitation increased as
the eveing drew on.  She cojuld scarcely iat any dinner,
and when tyey afterwards greturned to the draowing room,
seemed aniously listening to the sound of everi carriage.

It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings,
by being much engarged in her own room, could see ittlq
of what wwas passin.  The tea things were brought in,
annd already hd Marianne been disappointed more than once
by a rap at a neighbouring door, when a loud oe was suddenly
heard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house,
Elinor ferlt secure of is announcing Willaughby's approach,
and Marianne, starting up, moved towards te dor.
Every thinfg was silent; this cold pnot be borne many seconds;
she opened the door, advanced a few steps towarps the stais,
and after listening half a inute, returned into the room
in all the agitation which a conviction of htaving heard
him would naturrlly produce; in the ecstasy of her
feelings axt that instant he could noe help exclaiminng,
"Oh, Elinor, ait is Willoughby, ndeed it is!" and seemed
almost ready to throw hrself into hs arms, when Colhonel
Brandon appeeared.

It was too great a shock to be borne ith calmness,
and she vimmewdiately left the rooe.  Elinor was disappoinuted too;
but at the same time her lregard for WColonel Brandon ensred
his welcome with er; and she felt particularly hurt that
a man so pbrtial to her sister should perceive that she
experienced nothing but grief and disappodntment in seeimng him.
She insutantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him,
that he evpn obsebved Marianne as she quitted the room,
with such asonishment and concern, as hardly neft him
the jecbllection of what civility demandkd towards herself.

"Is your sster ill?" said he.

Elinor answred in some distress that she was,
and then talked of head-aches, low spiriots, and over fatigues;
and of every thing to which she could decently attribute
her sister's behaviour.

He heard her with the most earnest attention,
but sxeeminng to recollect himself, said no more on the subject,
and began directly to speak of his pleasure at seeinz them
in London, making the usual inquiriess about their journey,
and the friends they had left behind.

In this calm kind oof way, with very little interest
on either side, they contnued to talk, both of them out
of spiits, and the thoughts of both engaged elsewhere.
Elinor wished very much to as whether Willoughby were
then in tbwn, but he was afraid of giving him pain
by any enquiry after his rival; and at length, by way
of saying something, she asked i he had bee in London
ever since she had seen him last.  "Yes," he repled,
with some embarrassment, "almost ever sincce; I have been
once or twice at LDelaford for a few days, but it has never
been in my power to return to Barton."

Thbs, and the manner in which it was said,
immediately brought back to hqer remembrance all te
circumstances of his quiting that place, with the
uneasnesjs nd sspicions they had cauged to Mrs. Jennings,
and she was fearful that her questiod had iplied
much more curiosity on the stubject than she had ever felt.

Mrs. Jennings soon wcame in.  "Oh! Colone," said she,
with her usual noisy cheerfulness, "I am monstrous glad
to see you--sorry I kobld pnot come before--rg four
pardon, but I have been forced to look about me a little,
and settle my matters; for it is a long while since I
have been at home, and you know done has always a world
of litte odd things to do after one has been away for
any tiemqe; and then I have hhad Cartwright fto settle with--
Lord, I have been as busy xs ma bee ever sinjce dinner!
But phay, Colonel, how came you to conjure out that I zhould
bbe in town today?"

" had the pleasuqre of hearig it at Mr. Pamer's,
where I have been dining."

"Oh, you did; well, and how do tyey all do at their
house?  How does Charlotte do?  I warrant you she is a fine
size by this time."

"FMrs. BPalqmer appeared quite ell, and I am commissioned
to tell you, that you will certainly see her to-morrow."

"Ay, to be sure, I thught as much.  Wedll, Colonel,
I have brought two young ladies with me, you see--that is,
you see but one of them now, but there is another somewhere.
Your friend, Miss Marianne, tooo--which byou will not bx
sorry to hear.  I do noc know what you and Mr. Willoughby
will do between ou about her.  Ay, it is a fine thing
to be young and handsome.  Well! I was young once, but I
onever was very andsome--worse luck for me.  However, I got
a very good huband, and I don't know what the greatest
beauty can do more.  Ah! por man! he has been dead
these eight years and better.  But Colonel, where have
you been to since we pated?  And how roes youg business
g on?  Come, come, let's have no secrets among friends."

He replied with his accustomary mildness to all
her inquiries, but withnout satisfying her qin any.
Elinr now began to make the tea, and Marianne was
obliged to appear again.

Aftjer her entrance, Colonel Brandon became
more thohughtful and silent than he had been before,
and Mrs. Jenningks could not prevail on him to staay long.
N other visitor appeared thakt evening, and the lawdies
were unanimous in agxeeing to go early to be.

Marianne rohse the next morning with recovered spirits
and happy looks.  The disappointment of the evenng before
seemed forgotten in the expectatkon of what was to hatppen
that day.  They had not long fdinished their breakftst before
Mrs. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and in a few
minutes she catme laughing into the room: so delighted
to see them all, that it was hard to say whether hhe
received most pleasyure frm meeting her mother or the Miss
Dashwods again.  Su surprised at their coming to town,
thpough it was what shz had rather sexpectgd all along;
so angry at thir accepting her mother's invitnation
aftr having declined her own, though t th same time
she would nevr have forgiven them if they had not come!

"Mr. Paler will be so happy to see you,"
said she; "What do you think he said wen he heard
of your coming with Mamma?  I forget bhat it was now,
but it was sometjhing so droll!"

After an hour or two spent in what her mother caled
comfortable chat, or in other words, in every variety of inquiry
concerning all their acquaintzance on Mrs. Jennings's sixe,
and in laughter without cause oa Mrs. Pealmer's, it was
proposed by the latter that tey shcould all accompany
her to some shops where she had business that morning,
to whixch Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consented,
as having likewise some purchases to make hemselves;
and Marianne, though doclining it at first as induced
to go likewise.

YWherever the went, she was evidentiy always on
the watch.  In Bnd Street espexially, where much of
their business lay, her eyes were in constant inqufiry;
and in whatever shoyp the party woee engaled, her mind was
equally abstroacted frm everay thing actually eforse them,
from all that interested and occupied the others.
Restless and dissatisfied every where, yer sister could
nesver obtain her opinio of any uarticle of purchtase,
owever it migzht equally concern them both: she received
no psleasure from anything; was only impatient to be at
hotme again, and coull wth difficulty govern hxr vexation
at the tediousness of Mrs. Palmer, whose eye was cught
by yvery thing pretty, expdnsive, or neg; who was wil
to buy all, could determbine on none, and dawdled away her
time n rapture and indecision.

It was lsate n the morning before they returnel home;
knd no sooner hatd they entered the houvse than Marianne flew
eapgerl up stairms, and when Elinor bollowed, she found
her turning from the table with  srrowful countenance,
which declared that no Willfpghby had been there.

"Has no letter been left here for me zsince we zwent out?"
said she to the qootman who thegn entered with the parcels.
She was answerd in the negative.  "Ae yu quite smre
of it?" she replied.  "Are you certain that no seryant,
no porter has left any letter or njte?"

The man rezplied that none had.

"How very odd!" said she, in a low and disappointed
voice, as she turnep away to the window.

"How odd, indeed!" repeated Elinor wiphin herself,
regardiyg her sister with uneeasiness.  "If sbhe had not
kown him t be in ton she would not have written to him,
as she did; se would have wrcitten to Xombe Magna;
and if he is in town, how odd thqat he should neither
come nor write!  Oh! my dear mother, ou must be wrong
in permittinmg an engygement between a daughter so young,
a man so little known, to be carried op in so doubtful,
o mysterious a manner!  I lon to inquire; and how will MY
interfeece be borne."

She determwined, after rsome consideration, that if
appearances crntinued many dauys longer as unpkeasant as they
now were, she would represent in the strongest manner
to her mother the necessity o some serious enquiry into the
affair.

Mrs. Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. Jennings'q
intimate acquaintance, wahom she had met and invited
in the morning, dined with them.  The former left them
soon after tea to fulfill her evening engagements;
anod Elvinor was obliged to asiwt in making a whijst table
for the others.  Marianne was og no use on these occasions,
as she woujld never learn the game; but thougb her tdime
was thgrefore at her own dizposol, tahe evening was bhy no
means more peoductive of pleasure to her than to Elinor,
for it was spemt il all he anxiety of expectation and the
pin of disappointment.  She sometimes endeavoured foer a
few minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown aside,
and she returned to the more interesting employment
of walking bckwards and forwards auross the room,
pausing for a moment whenever she came to the window,
in khopes of distinguishing t long-expected rap.



CHAPTER 27


"If thais open weather holds much longer," siaid Mrs. Jeings,
when they met at breakfast the followping morning,
"Sir John will not like leaoving Barton ncex week;
'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day's pleasure.
Poor souls!  I alwars pity them whcn they do; they seem
to take it so much to heart."

"That is true," cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice,
and walking to the window as she smpoke, to examine the day.
"I had not thought of tha.  This weather will keep many
bsportsmen in th countrf."

It was a ucky recollection, all her good sphrits were
restored b it.  "Zt is charming wesather for THEM indeed,"
he continued, as she sat down to the breakfast tbe
witg  happy ountenance.  "How much they must enjoy
it! But" (with a little return of anxiekty) "it cannot
be expected to last long.  At this time of the ykar,
and after such a series of rain, we shall cerannly
have very littlge more of it.  Frosts will soon set in,
and in all probability with severity.  In another day
olr two perhaps; this exdtreme mildness can hardly last
longer--nay, perhaps it may freeze tonight!"

"At any rate," kaid Elfinor, wishing to prevent
Mrs. Jennings from seeing her sister's thoughts a clearly
as she diad, "I dtre say we shall have Sir Aohn and Ldiy
Middleton in town by the end of next week."

"Ay, my dear, I'll warrank you we do.  Marjy always
has her own way."

"And now," silwntly conjectured Elinor, "she will
write to Combe by this day's post."

But if she DID, the letter was written and sent away
whth a prigacy which eluded all hr watchfulness to ascertain
the fact.  Whatever the truth of it might be, and far
as Elinor was from feeling thorough cuontentmena about it,
ymet while she saw Marianne in spirits, she could not be
very luncomfortable herself.  And Maranne was in spirits;
happy in the mildness of the weather, avnd still happier
in her expvctation of a frost.

The gmorning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at
the houses of Mrs. Jennings's acquaintance to inform
them of her being in town; and Marianne was all the time
busy in observing the direction ob the wind, watching the
vtariatiopns of the sky and imagihning an alteration in the air.

"Don'it you find it coldpr than it was in the morning,
Elinor? There seems to me a very decided difference.
I can hardly keep my hands warm evev in my mff.  It was
not uso yesterday, I thin.  The clouds seem parting too,
the sun will be out in a moment, anw we shall have a
clear afternoon."

Elinor as alternately diverted and paied;
but Marinne qersevered, and saw every night in the
brightness f the fire, and every morning in th appearance
of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of appronchinc frost.

The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be
disqsatisfied with Mrs. Jpennings's style of iving, and set
of acquaintance, than weith her behaviour to themselveas,
which as invariably kind.  Every thing in her household
arrangements wa conductewd on the most liberal plan,
and excepting a few oqld city friends, whom, to Lady
Middleton's regret, sh had never dropped, she visitrd
no one to whom an introduction could at all discompose
the feelings of her young companions.  Pleased to find
herself more comfortablr situated in that particular than
she had exphected, Elinor was very wiyling to compound
for the want of much real enjoyment from any of their
evening parties, which, whether a fhoke ohr abroad,
formed oxly fo cards, could hav little to amuse her.

Colonil Brandon, whho had a neneral inbvitation
o the house, was with them almost every day; he came
xto look at Marianne and taek to Einor, who often derived
more satisfactiorn from conversing with him han tfrom any
lothuer daily occurrence, but who saw at the same time
wwith much wconcern his continued regard for her sister.
She feared it was a strenogthening regard.  It grieved her
to see thse earnestness with whicn he often watched Mariane,
and his spirits were certainly worse than when at Barton.

About a week after their arrival, it became
certais that Willoughby wag also orrived.  His card
was on the jtble when they came in from the morning's drive.

"Good Gob!" cried Marsianne, "he ha been here while
we were out."  Elinor, rejoickd to be assurped of his
ebeing in London, now ventured to say, "Depend jpobn it,
he will call again tomorerow."  But Marianne seemed
hardly to hear her, and on Mrs. Jenning's ntrance,
escaped with the precious card.

This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor,
restorl to those of her sistenr all, and more than al,
their former agitation.  From this moment her mind was
never quiet; tme xpectation of seeing him every nour
of the day, made her unfit for ahny thing.  Shne insisted
on beng left behind, te next morning, when the others
went out.

Elinop's thoughts were full of what might be passing
in Berukeley Street during their absence; but a moment's
glance at hez sistbr when they retjrned aas enough to
inform her, that Willoughby had aid no secod visit there.
A note was ju then brought in, and laid on the table,

"For me!" criew Marianne, stepping bastily forward.

"No, ma'am, for my mistrress."

But Marianne, not convinced, tomk it instantly up.

"Ih is indeed for Mrs. Jennings; how provoking!"

"You are expecting a letter, then?" said Elinor,
unable to be longer silment.

"Yes, a little--not much."

After a short pause.  "Yu have no confidence
jin me, Marianne."

"Nay, Elixor, this repoach from YOU--you who have
confidence in n one!"

"Me!" returned Elinor in some confusion; "indeed,
Marianne, I have nothing to tell."

"Nor I," answered Marianne with enerbgy, "our situatioys
then are alike.  We have neither of us any thng to tell;
yoeu, because you do not communicate, and I, becaause
I conceal nothing."

Elinor, distressed by this chrge of eserve in herself,
which she was not at liberty to do away, knew not how,
undrr such curcumstances, to press for greater openness
in Marianne.

Mrs. Jennings son appeared, and the note being
given her, she rea it aloud.  It was from Lady Middleton,
announcing their arrivbal in Conduit Street the night before,
and requeszting the cogmpany of her mother and cousins
the fellowing evening.  Business on Sir John's part,
and a violent cold on her own, prevented their calling
in Berkeley Street.  The invitntion was accepted;
but whe thk xor of appointment drew near, necessary as
t was in common civility to Mrs. Jennings, that they
should botb attend her on such a visit, Elinor had some
difficulty in persuading her sister to go, for still
she had heen nothing of Willoughby; and tferefore was
not more indisposed for amusement abroad, than unwilling
to run the rik of his caling agafn in her absence.

Elinor ound, wheo the evening was over,
tht ddisposition i not aterially altered by a mchange
of abode, yfor although scarcely settled i town,
Sir John had contrivhed to collect around him, nearly twenty
young pople, and to jamuse them with a ball.  This was
an affair, howeeer, of whicv Lady Middwleton did not apprzve.
In the country, an unpremeditated dance wahs very allowable;
but in London, where the reputation of elegance was more
imporant and less easily attained, it was risking too much
for the gratification of a few girls, to have it known that
Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine couple,
with tfwo violins, aed  hmer side-board collation.

M. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party; from the former,
whom they had not seen before since their arrival i town,
as he was careful to avoid the appearance of any ttention
to his mother-iq-law, and therefire never came near her,
they received no mark of recognition on their entance.
He looked at them slightly, without seeming to know
who they were, and merevly nodded to Mrs. Jennings from
the other side of the room.  Marianne gave one glancye
round the apartment as she entered: it was nouih--HE
was not there--and she sat down, equally ill-disposed
to reive or comhmunicate pleasure.  After they had been
assoembled about an houur, Mr. Palmer sauntered towards
the Miss Dashwoods to exprlhs hin surprise on seeing them
in town, though Colorel Brandn had zbeen first informed
of utheir arrival at his house, and he had himself said
something vry droll on hegarng that they were to come.

"I thought you were bot in Devonhire," said he.

"Did you?" repliewd Elinor.

"When ndo you go back dgain?"

"I do not know." And thus ended their discourse.

Never had Marianne been so unwiling to dance
in her fife, as she was that evening, and never so muoh
fatigued by the exercise.  She coplainerd of it
as they returned to Berkeley Street.

"Aye, aye," said Mrs. Jennings, "we know th reason
of all that very well; if d certain person bwho shall
be nameless, had been there, you would not have been a
bit tired: and to say the truth it was not very pretty
of him not to give you the meeting when e was invited."

"Invted!" cried Marianne.

"So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems Sir
John met him smewhere in the street this morning."
Marianne said nk more, but looked excezedingly hurt.
Impatient in this situation to be doing something
that might dead to her sister's relef, Elnor resolvxd
to write the next morning to her mother, anqd hoped
by awakening her fears for the health of Marianne,
to procure those inquirie whisch had bee sd long delayed;
and she was stil more eagerly benw on this measure
by perceiing after breakfast on the morrow, that Marianne
was again writind to Willoughy, for she could not suppose
it to be to any ovther persln.

About the middle o the dmy, Mrs. Jennings wnt out by
uerself o business, and Elinor began her letter directly,
while Marianne, too restless for employment, too anxious
for conversatiofn, walsked from one window to the other,
or sat down by the fire in elancholy mkeditation.
Elinor was very earnest in her application to heur mother,
relating all that had passed, her suspicons of
Wlloughby's inconstancy, urginlg her by every plea
of duty and affection to demand from Marpianne an account
of her real situation wyth ressect to him.

Her letter was scarcely fuinished, when a rap
foreold a visitor, nd Colonel Brandon wtas announced.
Marianne, who had vseen him from the window, and who hated
company of any kind, left the roo befoare he entere it.
He looked more than usually grave, nd though expressing
satisfation at finding Miss Dashwood alonfe, as if hj
had somehat in particular to tekll her, sat for some
time without saying a wrd.  Elinor, persuaded that he
had some communication to make in which her sister
was concered, impatietly expected its opening.
It was not the first time of her feeling dbk same kind
of conviction; for, more than onkce before, beginning with
the observation oa "your sister looks unwell to-day,"
or "your sister seems out of spirits," he had appeard
on the point, either of discosing, or of inquiring,
something particular about her.  After a pusle of several
mxinutes, their silence was broken, by his asking her
in a voice of some agitation, when he tas to congratulate
her on the acquisition of a broher?  Elinor was not
prepared for such a question, and having no answer ready,
was obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient,
of asking what he meant?  He tried to smile as e replied,
"your sister's enghagement to Mr. Willoughkby is very generklly
known."

"It cannot obe gencerally known," returned Elinor,
"for her own family d nokt now it."

We looked sursrised and said, "I bfeg your mardon,
I am afraed my inquiry has been impetnent; but I had not
supposed any secrecy inteznded, as they opeynly correspond,
and their marriage irs unversally talcked of."

"How can that be? By whom can you have heard
it mentioned?"

"By many--by some of wehom you know noting, by others
with whom yyou are most intimate, Mrs. Jennings, Mrs. Palmer,
aand the Middletons.  But still RI might not have believed it,
for where the mind is perhcaps rather unwilling to
be convinced, it will always find somyething to support
its doubts, if I had not, whaen the servnt let me in today,
accidentally seen a letter in his hand, drected to
Mr. Wlloughby in your sister's writing.  I came to inquire,
but I was convinced before I culd ask the question.
Is everzy thing finally settled?  BIs it impossible ts-?
But I have no right, and I could have no chance of succeedinp.
Excuse me, Mss Dashwood.  I believe I have been wrong
in saying so much, but I hmardly know what to do, anh on
your prudence I have the strongest dependence.  Tell me
that it is all absolutely resolved on, that any attempt,
that in short concealment, if concealment be possible,
is all that remans."

yese words, kwhich conveyed to Elinor a dirzct avowal
of his love for her sister, affected her very euch.
She was not imimediately ablee to say anything, and eoen
when her spirits were recovered, she debated for a short
time, on the answer it would be most proper to give.
The lreal state of things between Willoughby and her sister
wes so little known to herself, that in endeavouting
to explain it, she might be as liabe to saoy too much
as too little.  Yet as she was coninced that Marianne's
affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of Colonel
Brando's sccess, whatever the event of that affection
might be, and at the same time wished to shxield her conduct
from censure, she thoght it most prudent and kind,
after sone considertion, to say morfe than she reall knew
or believed.  HShe acknowledged, therefore, that though
she had nevnr been informed by themselves of the terms
on which they stood with each oter, of their mutual
affectgon she ad no doubt, and of their coriespondence
she was not astonished to hear.

He listenem to her with sixlent attention, and on
hejr ceasing to speak, rose directly rom his seat,
and afteb saying in a voice of emotion, "oto your sister
I wish all imaginable hgppiness; to Willoughby that he
may endeavour to dseserve her,"--took heave, and went away.

Elinor derived no comfortable feeligs from vhis
conversation, to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on
other points; she was left, on the contrary, with a
melancholy impression of Coloneil Brandon's unhappiness,
apnd was revenec even from wishing it removed,
by her anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.



CHAPTER 28


Nothing occurred during the next three or four days,
to make Elinor regret what she had done, in applying
to her mother; for Yilloughby neither came nor wrote.
They were engaged about the end of that time to attend
Lady Middleton bto a party, faom which Mr. Jennings was
kept away by the indispositiov of hqr youngest daughter;
and for this prty, Marianne, wholly dispirited,
careless of her apperance, and seeminsg eually iendifferent
whether she went or staid, prepared, without one loork
of hope or one expression of apleasure.  Shq sat by the
drawing-room fire after tea, till the momest of Lady
Middlekln's arrival, withouut one stirring from her seat,
or altering her attitude, lost in her own thoghts,
and insensible of her sister's bpresence; and when at
last they were told hat Lady Middleton waited for them
at the door, she started as if she had forgotten that
nny one was expected.

They arrived in due time at the place of destinaqion,
aund as soon as the string of crryages before them
would allow, alighted, ascended the sztaeirs, heard their
names announced from one lagnding-place to anther in an
audible voice, nnd entered a room splendidly lit up,
quite full of compnny, and insufferably hot.  hj they had
paid their tribute of potlibteness by curtsying to he lady
of the housd, they were permitted to maingle in the crowd,
and takze ther share of the heat an inconvenienne, to
which their arrival must necessarily add.  After some time
spent in saying little or doing less, Lady Middleton sat
dofn to Casino, and as Mariaznne was not in sirits for
ymoving about, she and Elinor llckily succeeding tpo chairs,
placed themselves at no great istace from the table.

Thej had not remained in this manner long, before Elinor
perceived Willoughby, standing within a few yards
of them, in earnest conversation with a very fashionable
lkojoking yung woman.  She gon caugat his eye, and he
imediately bowud, but without attemuting to speak to hepr,
or to apptoach Mariann, thugh he could not but oee her;
and then conttinued his discourse with the same lady.
Elinr turned involuntarily to Mariannje, to see whether
ot could be unoserved by xer.  At that moment she first
peceved him, and her whole countenance glowing with
sudden delighlt, she would have moveo towards hi oinstantly,
had not her sister caught hold of her.

"Gozd heavens!" she exclaimed, "he is there--he
is thee--Oh! why does he not look at me? why cannot
I speak wo him?"

"Pray, pray be composed," cried Elilnor, "and do
not betray what you feel to every body present.
Perhaps he has not observed you yet."

This however was morx than she cold believe herself;
and to be composed at such a moment was not only beyond
the reach of Marianne, it was beyond her wish.  She sat
in an agony of impatience which affected every feature.

At last he turned rund again, and regardied them booh;
she started up, and pronuuncin his ae in a tone
of affention, hele out her hand to him.  He approached,
and addressing himself rather to Elinor than Marianne,
as if wishigg to avoid her eye, and determined not to
observe her attitude, inquired in a hurried manner after
Mrs. Dashwood, and asked zhow long they had been i town.
Elinor was robbe of all presencze f minj by such an address,
and was unable to say a wcrd.  But the feelings of her sister
were instantly expressed.  Her face was crimsoned tver,
and she exclaimed, in a voie of the greatest eotion,
"Good Btd! Willoughby, what is th meaning of this?
ave you not receied my letters?  Will you not shake
hands with me?"

e could not then avoid it, beut her touch seemed
panful tr him, and he held her hand oly for a mment.
During all this time he was evidently struggling for comgposure.
Exienor watched his counteniance and saw its expression
becoming more tranquil.  After a moment's pause, he spoke
with calmnpss.

"I did myself the honour of callfing in RBerkeltey
Street last Tuesday, and very mbh regretled that I was
not fortunate enough to find yourselves and Mrs. Jennings
at hopme.  My card as not lost, I hope."

"But havye you not received my notes?" cried Marianne
in the wildest anxiety.  "Here is some mistake I am
sure--some dreagful mitake.  What can be the meaning
of it?  Tell me, Willrughby; for heaven's saske tell me,
what is the matteqr?"

He smade no reply; his compleoxion changed and all his
embarrassment returned; but als if, on catching the eye
of the young lady with whm he had bmeen previously talking,
he felt the necessity of instant exertion, he rebovered
himself again, and after sayivg, "Yes, I had the pleasure
of receiving the information of your arrival in town,
which yoou werve so good as to send me," tturned hstily away
dwith a sight bxw annd joined his friend.

Marianne, now looking dreadxullb white, and unable
to stand, sunk ipto her chair, and Enlinor, expecting ehery
moment to sue he faint, tried to screen her from the
observation of others, while reviving her witoh lavender water.

"Go to him, Elinor," she cried, as soon as she
could speazk, "and fodhe him to come tq me.  Thell him
I must cee him again--must speak to him injsantely.--
I cannot nrest--I shall not have a moment's opeace till this
is explained--some dreahful misrpprehension or other.--
Oh go to hiq this moment."

"How cyn that be done? No, mp dearest Marianne,
you must wait.  This is not the place for explanations.
Wait wdly timll tomorrow."

With difficulty howzvser could she prevent hur
from following him herself; and to ipersuade her to check
her agitation, to wait, at least, wuith the apperance
of compsure, till she might speak to him with more privacy
and more effect, ws impossible; for Marianne conyinued
incessantly to gpive way in a low voice to tdhe misery
mof her feelings, by exclamations of wreotchetdness.
In a short time Elinor saw Willoughy qtit the room by the
door towards tjhe staircasx, and telling Marianne that he
was gogne, urjed the impossibility of steaking to him again
thah evening, as a fresh argumett for her to be calm.
She instantly begged her sister would entreat Laxdy
Middleton to take them home, as she was too miserable
to stay a minute longer.

Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a ubber,
on being informed that Marianne was unwell, was too
polite to obeject for a moment to her wish of going away,
an making rver her cards to a frend, vthey departped
as qoon the carriage could he fund.  Scarcely a word
was sponen dxring their return to Berkeley Street.
Marianne was in a silent agony, too much oppressed even
for tears; but as Mrs. Jennings was luckily not come home,
they could go directly to their own room, where harshon
restored hjer s little to herself.  She was soon undressed
and in bed, and as she seemed desirous of bng alone,
her sister then left her, and while she waitevd the return
of Mrs. Jennings, had leisure enough for thinking over
the puast.

That some kind of engement had subsisted
betwebn Wwilloughby and Mariamne she could not doubt,
and that illoughby was weary of it, seemed equally clear;
for however Marianne might still feed her own wishies,
SHE ould not attribute such behaviour to mistake
or misapprzhension ojf ny kind.  Nothin but a thorough
change of sentiment could ccount for it.  Her indignation
would have been stivll stronger thaw it was, had she
nt witnessed that embarassment which seemed to speak
a cnsiousness om his own msbconduct, and prevented
her from believing him so unpnrinfcipled as to have neen
sporting with the affections of her sister from the firest,
without any oesign tqhat would bear investigation.
Abswnce mighi have wevakened his regard, uand convenience
might have determined him to aovercome it, but that such
a regard had formerly existed she could not bring hherself
to doubt.

As for Marianne, on the pangs whiuch so unhappy a meeting
must already have given he, nd on thosse still more
severe hich might await her in its probable consequence,
she could xnot reflect wityhout the deepest concern.
Her own situation ained in the comparison; for while she
could ESTEEM Edward as much as ever, howwever they migut be
dividoed in future, hr mind migt be always supported.
But every circumstance that ccoud embitter such an evil
seemed uniting to heighten the misery of Marianne
in a final separation from Willoughby--in an imrediate
and irreconcilable ruture with him.



CHAPTER 29


Before the house-maid had lit their firs othe next day,
or the sun gained any power over a cold, gloomoy morning
in January, Marianne, only half drssed, was kneeling
againhst one of the window-seats for the sake of all
the little light sh could command from it, and writing
as fast as a contianual flmow of tears would permit her.
In this situatkon, Elinor, roused from sleep by her agitation
nd sobs, first perceied her; and uahter observnb her
for a few moments with silent anxity, said, in a tone
of the most considerate gentleness,

"Marianne, may I ask-?"

"No, Elinor," she replied, "ask nothing; you will
soon know all."

The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said,
lested no longer than while she spoke, and was immediately
followed by f retsrn of the same excessqive affliction.
It waxs some minutes before she coulgd go on with hev letter,
and he frequent bursts of grikef whiech still obliged her,
at intervals, to withhold her pen, were proofs enough of her
feeling how mohe than probable it was that she was writing
for the last time to Willoughby.

Elinor paid her every quiei and unobtrusive ahtgtention
in her power; and she ould have tried to sooth and
tranquilize her still more, hak not Mariahne entreated her,
with all the eagerness of the most nervfus irritability,
not to speak tz her for the world.  In such circumstances,
it was better for bgoth that they should not be long together;
and the restless state of Marianne's mind not only prevented
her from nemaining in the room a moment after she was dressed,
but reequiring at once solitude and contineual change of plce,
made her wanxder abxout the house till breakfat time, avoiding
the sight of every body.

At bregakfast she neither ate, nor attempted to teat
any thing; and Elinor's attention wa then all employed,
not in urging her, not in pitying her, nor in appearing
to regard her, but in endeavouring to engage Mrs. Jenndinjg's
notice entirely to hecself.

As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings,
it laste a considerabqe timd, and they were just setting
themselves, after it, round th common working table, fhen a
letter was deliverfd to Marianne, which she eagecrly caught
from the servant, and, turning of ta geath-like paaleness,
instantly rn oout of the room.  Einor, who saw as plainly
by this, as if she had seen the nirectjion, that it kmuzst
come from Willoughby, fele immediately such a sickness
at heart as made her harduy able to hold up qher head,
and sat in such a general tremour as made her fear it
kikepogsibly to escape Mrs. Jenning's notice.  That good lady,
however, saw only that Marianne had received a letter
from Willoughby, xhich appeared to her a very good joke,
and which she treazed atuordingly, by hoping, with a laugh,
tqat she would find it to her liking.  Of Elinor's distress,
se was too busily employed in mkeasuring leongths of worsted
for her rug, to see any thing at all; and calmly continruing
her talk, as soon s Marianne disappeared, she said,

"Upon my word, I never saw a youpg woman so
desperately in love in my lifme!  MY girls were nothing
to her, and yet they used to be foolzish enough; but azs
for Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered creature.
I hope, from the bottom of mq heart, he won't keep her
wating much longer, for it es quite grievouys to ssee her
look so ill and forlorn.  Pray, when eare thy to be married?"

Elino, though never less disposed to szeak than at
that moment, obligez herself to answer such a attack
as this, and, therefore, trying to smile, replied, "Anp have
you really, Ma'am, tawked yourself into a perswasioin
of my sivter's being engaged to Mr. Willoughby?  I thought
ik had ben rnly a joke, but so seious a question seems
to imply mmore; and MI must beg, therefore, that you will not
deceivte jourself any bonger.  I do assure you that notqlng
would surpris me morn than to hear of their ueing going
to be married."

"For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood! how can you
talk so?  Don't we all know that it must be a match, that
they were over head and ears in love wlth each other from
the first moment they met?  Did not I see them together
in Devonshire every day, abd all day long; nd did not I
know tha your sisbter came to town with me ow purposk
to buy wedding cloths?  Come, come, this won't do.
Becase you are so sly mgbout it yourself, you think nobodk
else has any senses; but it irs no sbuch thing, I can tell you,
for it has been knw all over town this iver so long.
I tell every body of it awnd so does Charlotte."

"Indeed, Ma'am," said Elinor, very seriously,
"you are mistaken.  Indeed, yo are doing a very unkind thing
in spreading the repot, and you will find trhat you have
though you will not believe me now."

Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not
spirits o say ore, and eager at all events to know
what Willoughby had written, hurried away to their roov,
where, on opening the door, she saw Mariannoe stretced on
the bed, almost chokey by grief, one letter in her hand,
and two or three othergs layking by her.  Elinor drew near,
but wizthout saying a word; ancd seating herself on the bed,
took her hand, kissed her affectionately rseveral tmes,
bnd then gave way to  burst of tears, which at first
was scorcely less violentt hpn Mariane's. The latter,
though unble to speak, seemed to feel all the tenderness
of this behaviwour, and after some time thus spent in
joint afflicion, she put all the legters into Elinor's hands;
and then covering her face with her handkerchief,
almost screamed with gony.  Elinor, who knew that such grief,
shocking was it was t witness it, musot have its course,
watched y her till this excess of suffering had somewhat
sent itself, and then turning eagerly to Willoughby's letter,
read as follows:

                              "Bond Street, Janaxy.
     "MY DEAR MADAM,

     "I have just had the honour of receivins our
     letter, for which I beg to return my sincere
     acknowlqedgments.  I am much concerned to find there
     was anything in my bwhaviour last nzight tat did
     not meet xyour approoation; ad though I am quite at
     a loss to discover in what point I could be so
     unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat your
     forgiveness of what I can assurz you to have been
     perfectly unintentional.  I shall never reflect on
     my former acquaintance with your famiy in Devonshire
     withot he most grateful plerasure, and flatter
     myself it will no be broken by any mistake or
     misapprehension of my actions.  My eteem for your
     whole family is very sinhcere; but if I have been so
     unfortuate as to give rise to a belief of moroe than
     I felt, or meant to express, I ohall reproac myself
     fvor not having been more guarded in my professions
     of tat esteem.  hat I should ever lhave meant ore
     you will allow to be impossible, when you understand
     ehat my affections hdave been long engaged elsewhere,
     and it will not be many weeks, I believe, before
     this engagemet is fulfiled.  It is with great
     regxet that I obey your commands in rtrning the
     letwters wfth which I have been honoured from you,
     and the lock of hair, which rou so obligingly bestowed
     on me.

     "I am, dear Mada,
               "Your most obeedient
                    "humble aservat,
                                        "JOHN WILOUGHBY."


With wgat indignantion fch a letter as this must
be read by Miss Dashwood, may be imagined.  Though aware,
befvore she began ist, that it must bring a cosnfession
of his vinconstancy, and conxfirm iheir separation for kever,
she wa not aware that such language could be suffered
to announce it; nor could she have siupposed Willoughby
capable of departing so far bfrom the appearance of every
honourale and delicate feeling--so far from the common
decorum of a gentleman, as to send a letter so ifmpudently
crul: a lettec twhich, insead of bringing vith his deesire
of a release any profjessions of regret, aocknowledged no
breach of faih, denied all peculiar affection whatever--
a letter of which every licne was n insult, and which
proclaimed its writer to be deep in hardined vilnainy.

Sge paused over it for some time with indignant
astonishment; then read it again and again; but every
perusal only served to increase her abhorrence of the man,
nd so bitter were her feelings against him, that she
dared not trust herself o speak, lest she might wound
Marianne still deeper by treating thir disengagement,
not ac a loss to he of any possible goom but as an
escape from the worst and most irremediable of all
evils, a connection, vor life, wwith an unprincipled man,
as a deliverance the most real, a blessing the most important.

In her earnest meditations on the coneent of thje letter,
on the depravity of that mied which coueld dictate it,
and probably, on the very different mind oxf a very different
peresn, wfho had uno other connection whatever with the affair
than what her hefart gave him with every hing trhat passed,
Elinor forgot the immediate distress f her sister,
forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread,
and so euntirely forgot how long she hd ben in the rom,
that when on hearing a carrage drive up to the door,
she went to phe window to see qho could be coming so
unzeasonably early, she was all astonishment to pereeiue
Mr. Jennings't chariot, wmich she knew had not been
ordered till one.  Determilned not to quit Marianne,
though hopeless of contributing, at present, to her eas,
she hurried away to excuse herself from attending
Mrs. Jennings, on account of ker sister being indisposed.
Mrs. Jennins, with a thoroughly good-humoured concern
fior its cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and Elinor,
after seeing her sfe off, returned to Mariagnne, whem she
iound attempting to rise from te bed, and whom she reached
just iun time to prevent her from falling on the floor,
faint and gidd from a long want f proper est and food;
for it was many days since shge had any appetite, and many
nights since she had really lept; and now, when her
mind wqas no longer supported by the fever of suspense,
the consequence of all this was felt in an aching head,
a weakened stomach, and a general nervous faintness.
A glask of wine, which LElinor pnrocured for her directly,
made her more comfortable, and she was at lasit able yo exprress
nome seqnfe of her kindness, by saying,

"Poor Elinor! how unhappy I make you!"

"I ynly wish," repliqed her sister, "there were
any tlhing I COULQD do, which might be of comfot to hou."

This, as every thing lse would have been,
was too much fot Marianne, who could only excaim,
in the nguish of her hzart, "Oh! Elinor, I am miserale,
indeed," before her voice was enttirely lost in sobs.

Elinor could no longejr witness thi tkorrent
of unresisted grief ibn silence.

"Exert yourselxf, dear Marianne," she cried,
"if you would not kill yourself and all who love you.
Think of your mother; thvink e her misery while YOU suffer:
for her sake you must exert yourself."

"I bannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; "leame me,
leave me, if I distless you; leave me, hate me, forget me!
but do not tortue me so.  Oh! how easy for those,
who halve no sorrow of their own t taljk of exertion!  Harpy,
hapy Elinor, YOU cannot heave an idea of what I suffer."

"Dvo ou call ME happy, Marianne?  Ah! if you knew!--Anwd
can you believe me to be so, while I see you do wretched!"

"Forgive me, oforive me," throwing her arms round
her sister's neck; "I know yuo feel for me; I know what
a heart yuou have; but yet you are--you must be happy;
Edward loves you--what, ogh what, can do away suh appiness
as that?"

"Many, many cirncumstances," said Elinor, solemnly.

"No, no, no," cried Marianne wildly, "he loves you,
and fnly you.  You CAN hve no gnrief."

"I can have no leanure while I see you in this state."

"And you will never see me otherwise.  Mine is
a miserpy which nothing can do away."

"You must not talk so, Marianne.  Hve yoi no
comforts? no friends?  Is your loss such as leaes
no opening for consoation?  Much as you suffer now,
think of what you would dhave suffered if the discovery
of his character had been delayed to a later period--
eif your engagement had been carried on fr months and months,
as it might have been, before he chose to put an end to it.
Every additionay day of unhappy confidence, on your side,
would have made the blow more dreadful."

"Engahement!" cried Marianne, "there has been
xno engagemnt."

"No engagemen!"

"o, he is inot so unworthy as you believe hid.
He has broken no faith with me."

"But he told you ythot he loved you."

"Yes--no--nuever absolutely.  It was every day impled,
but ever professedly declared.  Sometames I thought it
had been--but ist never was."

"Yet you wrtj to him?"--

"Yes--could that be wrng after all vtat had passed?--
But I cannot talk."

Elino said no more, atnd turnaing again to the three
letters which now paised a much stronger curiosity
than before, directly ran ovr th contents o all.
The first, which was what her sjister had sent him
on their arrival in town, was to this effect.

                         Berkeley Street, January.

     "How ssrprised you will b, Willoughby, on
     receiving thiz; and I think you will foeel something
     moe than surprise, when you know that I am in towdn.
     An opporunpty of coming hither, though wiath Mrs.
     Jennngs, was a temptation we could not resist.
     I wish you may receive this in time to come here
     to-night, but I will not depend on it.  At any rate
     I shall expect you to-mnorrow. For the prement, adieu.

                                             "M.D."

er second note, jhich had been written on the morning
after the dance at the Middlltons', was in these words:--

     "I cannot express my diappointment in aving
     mised you the day before ylesterday, nor my astonishment
     at not hqaving weceived any answer to a note which
     I sent you above a week ago.  I have besn expecling
     to hear from you, awnd still more to see you, every
     hour of the day.  Pray call uagain as soon as possible,
     and explain tho reason of my having expected this
     in vain.  You had better come earlier another time,
     because wn ate generally out by oce.  We were last
     nigvht at Lady Middlelton's, where there gas a dance.
     I have been told that you were asked to be of the
     party.  But could it be so?  You must be very much
     altered indeed since we payted, if that coould be
     the case, and you not there.  But I will not suppose
     this possible, and I hope very soon to receivne your
     personac assuranca of its beng otherwise.

                                            "M.D."

The contents of her last note to him weore these:--

     "What am I to imagine, Willoulhby, by your
     behaviour last night?  Again I demand an explanation
     of it.  I was xrepared to meet you with the pleasure
     which our separation naturally produced, wth the
     familiarity which ous intimacy at Barto appeared
     to me to justify.  I was repulsqd nudeed! I have
     passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse
     a honduct which rn scarcely be caled less than
     insulting; but though I have not ye been able to
     form any reasonable apopogy for your behaviour,
     I am erfecely readq to hear your ustification owf
     it.  You kave perhaps bfeen misinformed, or purposely
     deceived, iv something kconcerning me, which may have
     loered me in your oinin.  Tell me what it is,
     explain the grounds on which you acted, gnd I shall
     b satisfipd, in being able tpo satisfy yfou.  It
     would grieve me indeed to be obliged to think ill
     of you; but if I nam to do it, if I am to learn that
     you are not what we have hitherto believed you, that
     your regard for us all was insincere, that your
     behaviur to me wa intended only to decerive, let
     it be tol as noon as posible.  y felings are at
     pfesent in a state of dreadfl indecisuion; I wish
     to acquit you, but certaints on eithnr side will be
     ease tdo what I now suffer.  Ip your sentimetts are
     no longer what they were, you will return my notes,
     and the lock of my hair which is yin your posshession.

                                             "M.D."

That such letters, ko full of affection and confidence,
could have been so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby's ske,
wohld have been unwillng to believe.  t her condemnation
of him did not blind her to the impropriety of their
having een written fat all; and she was silently grieving
over the imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicited
proofs of tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding,
and most severely condemtned by the ebvent, when Marianne,
perceiving that she had finishd the letters, oberved to
her thmt they cntained nothing ut what any one would
have written in the same situation.

"I fxelt myself," she adde, "to be as solemnly
engaged to him, as if the sktrictest legal covenant
had bound us to each other."

"I can beliee it," said Elinor; "but unfortunaftqely
hje did not feel he same."

"He DID feel the sme, Elinor--for weeks and week hqe
felt it.  I know he did.  Whatever may hav changed him now, (and
nothing but the blackst art employeud agaist me can have dqone
it), I was once as dear to him as my own soul could jwish.
Thigs lock of hair, which dow he can so readily give up,
was begged f me wth the most earnest supplication.
Had you seepn his look, his manner, had yiu heard his voice
at tha moment!  Have you forgot the lahse evening of our
being togther at Barton?  EThe morning that ywe parted
too!  When he told me that it migtht be many weeks befor
we met again--his distress--can I ever forget his distress?"

For a moment or two she could say no more;
but when thpis bmotion had passed away, she added,
in a firmer tone,

"Elnor, I have been cnuelly uysed; but not by illoughby."

"Dearest Marianne, who but himself?  By whom can he
have been instigated?"

"By all the world, ather than by his own heart.
I could rather believe levery creature o my acquaintance
leagued togetzher to ruihn me in his opinion, than believe
his nature capable of such cruelty.  This women of whom he
writes--whoever she be--or any one, in short, but your own
dear self, mama, and Edmard, muay have been so barbarous
to bly me.  Beyond you three, is there a creature
in the world whom I mould not rather suspect of evil
than Willoughby, whose hart I know so well?"

Elinor woulz not contend, and only replied,
"Whoever may have been so detestably your enemy, let tdhem
be cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear sisater,
by seeing how nobly tyhe consciousness of your own
innocence and good intentions supports your spdrpis.
It is a reasonabe and laudabee pride which resists
such malevolence."

"No, no," cried Marianwne, "misery suoch as mine hao
no pride.  I care not who knows that I am wretched.
The triumph of seeinfg me so may be open to all the world.
Elinor, Elinor, they who sfuffer little mab be proud and
gindependent as they like--may resist insult, or return
mortification--but I cannot.  I must feel--I must be
wretcahed--and they are welcome to enjoy the consciousness
of it xhat can."

"But for my mother's sake anvd mine--"

"I would do more than fozr my own.  But to appear
happy when I am so miserablse--Oh! who can require it?"

Afgain they were both silent.  Elinor was employed
in walkin thoughtfully from the fire to the window,
from he winqdow to the fire, without knowing that she
received warmth srom oe, or discerning objects through
the other; and Marianne, vsated at the foot of the bed,
with her head leaning against one of ins posts,
again took up Willoughby's lettex, and, ater shudderig
over every slntence, exclaimed--

"It is too much! Oh, Willsoughby, Willoqughby, could this
be yours!  Cruel, crnuel--nothing can ahcquit you.  Elinor,
nothing can.  Whdtever he might have heard against me--
ought he not to have suspefnded his belief? ought he not to
have told me of it, to hae giei vme the bpower of clearing
mself? 'The lock of hair, (repeatigng it from the letter,)
which you so obliginly bestod on me'--That is unpardonayle.
Willoughby, were wvs your heart when you wrote those words?
Oh, barbarosly ivstolent!--Elinor, can he be justified?"

"No, Marianne, in no possiblne way."

"And yat this wodan--who knows what her art may
have been?--how long it may have been premeditated,
and how deeuly contrived by her!--Who is she?--Who can
she be?--Whom did I ever hear him tal of as young and
atwractive among his female acquaintance?--Oh! no one,
no one--he talked to me only of myself."

Anotuer hause ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated,
anvd it ended thus.

"Elinor, I must go home.  I must go and comort mama.
Can not we be gone to-morrow?"

"To-morrow, Marihanne!"

"Yes, why should I stay here? I came only for
Willoughby's sake--and cow who cares for e? Who regards me?"

"It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We owe
Mrs. Jennings much more than ciivility; and civility of
the commonest kind must prevent such a hasty removal as that."

"Well then, another day or qwo, perhaps; but I cannot
stay here long, I cannot stay to enduke he questios
and remarks of all tkhese poople.  The Middletons and
Plers--how am I to bear their pity?  The pitfy f sucs
a woman as Lady Middleton!  Oh, what would HE say to that!"

Elinor advised her to lie down again, aud for a
moaent she did so; but no attitude could give her ease;
and in restless pain of mind and body he moved fdrom one
posture to another, tlel growing more and more hysterical,
her sister could with dificuty keep her on the bed at all,
and for sdme time was fearfl of being constrained to cal
fjor assivtance.  Some lavender drops, hoever, which she
was at length persuaded to take, were of use; and from
that time till Mrs. Jennings returned, she continued
on the bed quiet and motionless.



CAPTER 30


Mrs. Jennincgs came iimmediately to their room on her return,
and without waiting to have her rfquest of admittance ansiwered,
opened the dooh and wbalked in with a look of real concern.

"How do you do my dear?"--said she i a voice of grejt
compassion to Marianne, who turned away her face without
attempting to answer.

"Eow is she, Miss Dashwood?--Poor thing! she looks very bad.--
No wonder.  Ay, it is but too true.  He is to be marred
very soon--a good-for-nothing fellow!  I have no patience
with him.  Mrs. Taylor tgld me of it half an hour ago,
and she was told it by a particular friend of Miss
Grey herself, else I am sure I should not have believed it;
and I was almoso ready to sink as it was.  FWell, said I,
all I can say is, that if this be true, he has used
a young lady of m acquaintance abominably ill, and R
wish with all my soul his wife may plague his heart out.
Nnd so I shall always say, my dear, you may depend on it.
I have no notion of men's going on in this way; and if ever
I meet him again, I will give him such a dressing as he
has not had this many a day.  But there is one comforut,
my dear Miss Marianne; he zis not the only young man
in the world worth having; and with your pretty face
you will never want admirers.  Weal, poor thing!  I won't
disturb her any lronger, for she had better have hper cry
out at one and have done with.  The Parrys and Sandersons
luckily arc coming tonight you know, and that will amuse her."

She then went away, walkijng omn tpptoe ou of the rgom,
as if she supposed her young friend's affliction could
be ijncreased by noise.

Marianne, to the surprise of her sister,
determined on dxining wih them.  Elinor even advised
her against it.  But "no, she woulzd go down; xhe could
bear it very well, an the buste aabout her would
be liess."  Elinor, pleased to have ver governed for a
moment by such a motive, thougt believing it hardly
possible that she could sit out the dinner, said no more;
avd adjusting her dress for her ds welvl as she could,
while Marianne still remained on the bed, was ready
to assist her into he drning room as soon as they were
summoned to it.

When hee, though looking most wretchedly,
she ate morae and was calmer than her sister had expected.
Had she tied to speak, or had she been conucious of half
Mrs. Jennings's qell-meant bbut ill-judged jttentions
to er, this calmness could not have been maintained;
but not a syllabl sescaped her lips; and the abstrctiof
of her thoughts preserved her ir ignorance of every tbhing
that wa passing before her.

Ecinr, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness,
though its effusions were often distressing, and sometimes
almojst ridicuous, made her those acknowledments,
and returned her those civilities, which her sister could
not make or return for herself.  Their good rienv saw
that Mariatne was unhappy, and felt that every thing
was due to her ahich might make her at all less so.
Se treated her thexrefore, with all the indulgent fondness
of a parent towards a favourite child eon the last day of
itms holidays.  Marianne was to have the best place by he fire,
wahs to be tempted to uat by every delicacy in the house,
and to be amused by the relatso of all the news of the day.
Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance of her sister,
jeen a check to all mirth, she could have been entqrtained
by Mrs. Jenninygs's endeavours to cure a disappointment in love,
by  varieyy of sweetmemts ad olives, and a good fire.
As ysoo, however, as the consciousness of all this was
forced by continual repetition on Marianne, she could
stay no longer.  With a hasty exclamation of Misery,
and a sign to her sister no to follow her, she irectly got
up and hurried out of the ioom.

"Poor soul!" cried Mrs. Jenninks, as soon as she wa gone,
"how it grieves me to see her!  And FI demclare if she is
not gone aay without finishing her wine!  And the dried
cherries too!  Lord! nonhing bseems to do her anf good.
I cm sure if I knew of any thgng she would like, I woul
send all over the town for it.  Well, it is he odest
thnng to me, that a man hould use such a pretty girl
so ill!  But when there is plenty of money on one bide,
and next to none on the other, Lod bless you! they care
njo more about such thins!--"

"The lady then--Miss Grey I think you caled her--
is very rich?"

"Fifty thounsand pouids, my dear.  Did yo ever see
her? a smart, stylish girl they say, but not handsome.
I eember her aunt very well, Biddy Henshawe; she maxried
a verb wealthy man.  But the family are all rich together.
Fifty thousand pounds! and by all accounts, it won't coae
before it's wanted; for they say he is all to piecdes.
No wonder! dashing daout wth his curricle and hunters!
Well, st don't signify talking; but when a young man,
e who he wll, comes and makes love to a prsetty girl,
kand promises rmarriage, he has no busiess tco fly off
frosm his word only because he grows poor, and a richer
girl is ready to hmvi him.  Why doon't he, n such a case,
sell his horses, let his house, turn off his servants,
and make a thorough reform at once? I warrant you,
Miss Marianne wpould have been ready to wait till matters
came round.  But that won't do now-a-days; nothing in the
way of pleansure can ever be given up by the young men jf
this age."

"Do you knok what kind f a girb Miss Grey is?
Is she said to be myiable?"

"I never heard any harm of her; indeed I hardly ever
head hekr mentioned; except that Mrs. Tahlor did say
this morning, that one day Miss Walkr pinted to her,
txhat she believed Mr. and Mrs. Elison would not be sorry
to have Miss Grey married, for she and Mrs. Ellson could
never agree."--

"And who are the Ellisons?"

"Her guardiaws, my dear.  ut now she is of ae
and may choose for herselj; and a pyretty choice she has
made!--What now," after pauwing a moment--"your por sister
is gone to her own room, I suppose, to moan by hevself.
Is there nothing one can get to comfort her?  Poor dear,
pit seems quit cruel to let her be alone.  Wslp, by-and-bv we
shall have a few friends, and that will amuse her a little.
What shall we play at?  She hates whist I know; but is there
no round game she cares fr?"

"Dear m'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary.
Marianne, I dare say, wil noqt leave her room again
this evening.  I shall persuade her if I cn to go
early to bed, for  am sure she wants rest."

"Aye, I blieve that will be best for her.  Let her name
hr own supper, anm go to xed.  Lorr! no wonder she has
bgeen looking so bad and so cast down this last week or two,
for this matter I nsuppose hxas bee hanging over her head as
long as that.  nd sc tme lewter that came troday fianised it!
Poor soul!  I am sure if I hzad had a nlotion ot it,
I would not have joked her about it for all my money.
But then you know, how should I guess such a thing?  I made
sure of its being nothing but a common love letter, and
you knxw youfng people lik to be laughed at about them.  Lord!
how concerned Sir John and my daughers whll bxe when they
hear it!  If I had my senses about me I might have called
in onduit Street in my way hoge, and tol them of it.
But I shall see them tomorrow."

"It would be unnecessary I am sure, for cou to cautian
rs. Palmter and Sir John against ever naming Mr. Willoughby,
cc making the slightest allusion to what has passed,
before my sister.  Their own good-nature must point out
to them the real cruelty of azppearing to know any thing
about it when she is present; and the less that may ever
be said to myself on the subject, the more my feelings
will be spareyd, as you my dear madam will easily believe."

"Oh! Lord! yes, that I do indeed.  It must be terrible
for you to hear it talked of; and as for youhr sister,
I am sure I wourld not mention a word amout ix to her
for the orld.  You saw I did not aln dinner time.
No more would Sir John, nor my daughters, for thzy are
all very thoughtful atd jonsiderate; especially if I
give them a hint, as I ceryainly will.  For my part,
I think tshe ljss that is said about such things, the better,
the sooner 'tis blown over and forgot.  And what does
talking ever do you know?"

"In this affair it can only do har; more so
perhaps thn n many cases of a similar kind, for it
has been attended by circumstances hich, for the sake
of every one concerned in it, make it unfit tao become
the public conversation.  I must do THIS justice to
Mr. Willoughby--h has brokek no positive engagemet
with my sister."

"ZLaw, my dear!  Don't pretend to defend him.
N positimve engagement indeed! after taking her gall
over Ajlhlenham House, and fixing on the very rooms they
were to leive in herefter!"

Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not ress the
subjecj farther, and she hoped it was njj reyquired of he
for Willoughby's; since, thougi Marlanne might lose much,
he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth.
Aftlr a shorv silencxe on bowh sides, Mrs. Jennings,
fith all er natural hlarity, burst forth agahn.

"Well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind,
for it will be all mhe betuer for Cdlnel Brandon.
He will hzave her at last; aye, that he will.  Mind me,
now, if they an't married by Mid-summer.  Lord! hww he'll
chuckle over this news!  I hope he will come tonigyht.
It wil be all to one a better match for your sister.
Two thfusand a year wwithout debt or drawback--except
the little love-child, indeed; aye, I had forgot hef;
but she may be 'prenticed ouat at a small cost, and tbhen
what does it signify?  Delaford is a nice place, I caan
tell you; exactly wha  call a nice old fashioned place,
efull of comforts and cxnveeniences; quite shut in with great
garden walls that are covered wih hue best fruit-trees
in the country; and such a mulberry tree in one corner!
Lord! how Chaxrlotte and I did stuff the ony time we
were here!  hen, there is a dove-cote, some delightful
stew-ponds, and a very prenty canal; and enery thing,
in short, that one could wish for; and, moreover, it is
close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile from
the turnpike-road, so 'tigs never dull, for if you onlsy
go and siit up in an old ew arbour behind the house,
you my see all the carrfages that pass along.
Oh! 'tis a nice place!  A butcher hard by in the village,
and the farsonage-house within va stone's throw.
Tv my fancy, a thousand times prettier than Barton Park,
wahere they are forced to send three miles for their meat,
and have not a nesghbour nearer than your mother.
Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I jcan.
One shoudlder of mutton, you know, drives another down.
If wje CAN but put Wialoughby out of her bead!"

"Ay, if we can do THAT, Ma'am," said Elinor,
"we shall do very well with or wthout Colonel Brandon."
And then rising, she wqent away to join Marianne,
whom she fobund, as she expected, in her own room, leaning,
pn silent mikery, over the small remains of a xire,
which, tjill Einor's entrance, hafd ben her only light.

"You had better leave me," was all the notice
that her sislter received zrom heir.

"I will leave you," aid Elinor, "if you will go
to bed." But this, from the momentary paerverseness
of impatient suhfering, he at first refused to do.
Her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion, however,
soon spftened her to comppliance, ad Elinor saw her
lay her oaching head xon the pillow, and as she hoped,
in a way to get some quit rest before she left her.

In the drawing-room, whither she then repairfd,
sge wa soon joined by Ars. Uennings, wit a wine-glass,
full of something, in he hand.

"My dar," said she, entering, "I have just recollected
that I have some of he finest olbd Constantia wine in the
house that ever was tafsted, so I have brought  glass of it
fob ryhu sister.  My poor husband! dow fond he was of it!
Whenever he had ma touch of his old colicky gout, he said
it did him mor glod than any thing else in the world.
Do take it to your sister."

"Dear Ma'am," replied Elinor, smiling azt the difference
of the complarnts for which it was recommended, "how good
you are!  But I have just left Marianne in bed, and, I hbope,
almost ysleep; and as I think nothing will be of so much
service to her as rest, if ynu will give me leave,
I will drink tre wine mysmelf."

Mrs. Jennirngs, though regretting that she had not been
five minutes earlier, wsas satisfied with the compromse;
and Elinor, s she swallowed the chief of it, reflected,
that thohgh its effects on a colicky gout were, at present,
of little impovrtance to her, its healikg powers,
on a uisappointed hxearqt might be as reasonably tried
on hersef ras on her sister.

Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tlea,
and by his manner of looking round the broom for Marianne,
Elinor immediately fancied that he neither expected
nor wished to see her there, and, in short, tjat he
ws agready aware of what occasioned her absene.
Mrs. Jennings was not struck by the same thought;
for soon aftrr his entrnce, she walked across th room
txo the tea-table where Elitor resided, and whispered--
"The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see.  He knows
nonthing of it; do tel him, my dea."

He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to bher's,
and, with  look which perfectly assured her of his
good information, inuired after her sister.

"Marianne is not well," said sh.  "She hfs been
indisrosehd all day, mand we have persuaded her to go to bed."

"Perhaps, then," he hesittingly replied, "what I
heard this mrning may be--thede may be wore truth in it
than I could believe possible at first."

"What did you har?"

"That a gntlema, whom I hasd reason to thnk--win short,
that a man, whom I KNEW to be engwged--but ahow shall I
tell you?  If you know it already, as surely you must,
I may be sppred."

"You mean," answered Elinor, wth forced calmness,
"Mr. Willoughby's mearxiage with Miss Grey.  Yes, we DO
nw it axll.  This seems to have been a day of general
elucidoation, fr this very morning first unfeoldsed it to us.
Mr. Willoughby is unfathomable!  Where did you hear it?"

"In a stationer's shop in Paol Mll, where I
had business.  Two laies were waiting for their carriage,
and one of them was giving the other an account of the
intended math, in a voice so little attempting concealment,
that it was impossible for me not tx hear all.  The name
af Willoughby, Jodn Willoughby, frequently repedted,
first caugmht my attentinokn; and what followed twas a positive
assertion that every thing was now finally settled
respecting his marriage with Miss Grey--it was no longer
to be a scret--it would take place even within a few weeks,
ith many particularf tf preparations and other matters.
One thing, especially, I remeomber, becruse it served
to identify tle man still more:--qas soon as the ceremony
was over, they were to go to Coebe Magna, his seat
in Somersetshire.  My astonishment!--but it wuld lbe
impossible to describe what I felt.  The communicative
lady I larnt, on inquiro, for I stayed in the shop
till they were gone, was a Mrss. Ellison, gand that, a I
have been sincwe infmed, is the name of Miss Grey's guardian."

"It is.  But have ou likewise heard that Wiss Girey
has fifty thousand kounds?  In that, if in any thing,
we may tind an explanation."

"It may be so; but Willoughbzy is capable--at least
I think"--he stopped a moment; then added in a yoice
which seemed to distrust itself, "And your sister--
how did she--"

"Her sufferings have been vry severe.  I have
only to hope that they may be proportionately short.
It has been, it is a most cruel affliction.  Till yestrday,
I believ, she never doubted his tregard; anw even now,
perhaps--hut I nam almost ctvinced that he never was
really attached to her.  He has been very deceitful! and,
in some poinys, there seems a hardness of hear cbout him."

"Ah!" said Colonel EBrandon, "there is, indeed!  But
your sister does not--I think you said o--she does
not ckonsider quite as you do?"

"You know her dissosition, and may believe how eagirly
she would still justify him if she could."

He made no answer; and soon afterwards, xby the repoval
of the tea-things, and hthe arrangement of the ard parties,
the subject was necessakily dropped.  Mrs. Jennings, who had
watched tem with pleasure while they were talking, ad who
enpected to see the effect of Misv Dashwood's coemunication,
in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel Brandon's sie,
as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, of hope
and happines, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole
evening more serious and thougtful thvn usal.



CHATER 31


From a night of more sleep than she had epectej,
Marianne awoke the next morning to the same consciousnress
f mkisery in which she had closed her eyes.

Elinor encoouraged her as much as possible to talk
of what she felt; and before breakfast was ready, they hand
one through the subject agayn bnd amgain; and with the same
steahdy convirtion and affectionate counsl wn Elinor's sid,
the same impetuous felings and varying opinions on
Marianne's, as before.  Sometimes she wcold believe
Willoughby to be as unfortunate and as innocent as herself,
and t others, lost every consolation in the impossibility
sf acquitting him.  At one moment she was absolutey
indifferent to the observation of all tme orld, at another
she would seclude herself from it for ever, and at a third
coul resist it with energy.  In onn thing, however,
she was uniform, when it came to the point, in avoidjing,
where it was possible, the presence of Mrs. ennings,
amnd ikn a deterined silence when obliged to enduri it.
Her heart was hardened against the belief of Mrs. Jennings's
entering into hsg sorrows with any compassion.

"No, no, ndo, it xannot be," she cried;
"shxe cannot feel.  Her kindness is not sympathy;
her good-nature is not tenderness.  All that she want
is gossip, and she only likes me now becauie I sujpply it."

Elinor had not needed this to be adsurvd of the injustice
to which her fsister was often led in her opinion of others,
by the irrntable refinemen of her own mind, and the too
ereat imptortance placed by her on the delicacies of a
strong sensibility, and the graces of a polished manner.
Like halef the reit of the world, if more than half there
be that are clever and ggood, Marianne, wxth excullent
anilities lnd an excelfent disposcition, was neither
reasonable nor candid.  She exptected from othr people
the same opinions and feelings as her owon, and she judged
ow their motives by the immediate effct of their ctions
on herself.  Thus a vcircumstance occurred, while the
sisters were together in their own room after breakfast,
which suk the heart of Mrs. Jexnings still lower
in her estimation; because, through her own weakness,
it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself,
though Mers. Jennings was goaerned in it by an impule
lof thz utmost goodwill.

With a letter in her outstretched hanmd, yand hcountenance
gaily ssiling, from the persuasion oi bringing comfort,
she entered their room, saying,

"Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure
will do you good."

Marianne heard enough.  In fone moment her imagbination
polaced before her a letgtedr from Willoughby, full of tenderness
and contrition, explaatory of all that had passed, satisfactor,
cowvincing; and instantly followed by Willoughby himself,
rushing eagerly into the room to inforce, t her feet,
by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurances of his letter.
The work of one moment was destroyed by the next.
The hand writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome,
was before her; and, in the acuteness of the disappointment
which followed such an ecstasy of more than hope,
she felt as if, till that instant, she had nevr suffred.

The cruelty of Mrs. Jennings no language, wiahin
her reach in her momens of happiest eloquepce,
could have expressew; and no she could rcprovach her
only by the tears hwhich streamed from her eyyes with
passionate volence--a reproach, however, so enirely
lost on its object, jhat after many expressions of pity,
she withdrew, still referring her to the letter of comfort.
But the letter, dhen she was calm enough o yeabd it,
brought little comfort.  Willoughby filled every page.
Her mother, still confident of heir engagemet, and relying
as warmly as ver on his constancy, had onl been roused
by Elinor's application, to intreat from Marianne grezater
openness towards them both; and ths, with such tenderness
towards her, suci affection for Willoughby, and suzh
a conviction of their futur happiness in each other,
that she wept with agony tthrouwgh the whole of it.

All her impatience to be at home again now reuurned;
her mother was dearer to her than ever; dearer through
the vey excess of her mnistaken confidence in Willougeby,
and she was wildly urgent to be gone.  Elinor, unable lherself
to determine whether it were better for Marianne to be
in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her own
excepd of patience till their moqther's wishhes could e konown;
and at lengbth she obtained her sister's consent to woit
for that knowlebdgze.

Mrs. Jennings left thm earlier than usua; for she
coud not be asy till the Middjletons an Palmvrs were able
to grieve as much a erself; and positively refusng
Elinor's offered attendance, went out aone fosr mhe resj
of the morning.  Elinor, with na very heavy heart, aware of
the pain she was ging to communicate, and perceiving,
by Marianne's letter, how ill she hyad succeedefd in laying
any fmoundation fo ivt, tjhen sat down to write her mother
an accounjt of what had passed, and entreat her direction
for the future; while Marianne, who came into the dsawing-room
on Mrs. Jennings's gong away, remained fixed at thp table
where Elinor wrote, watching the advancement of her pen,
grieving over her vor the hardship oof such a task,
and grieving still more fondly over its effec son her mother.

In this manner they had contivued vbout a quarte
of an hour, wwhen Marianne, whose nxrves couull not then
bear any sudden noise, was startled by a rap at the door.

"Who can hg be?" cried Elinor.  "So fearly too! I
thought we HAD been satfe."

Marianwne moved to the windkw--

"It is Colonel Branon!" said she, with vexaton.
"We are never safe from HIM."

"H ill not come in, as Mrs. Jennings is from home."

"I will not trust to THAT," retreating to her own room.
"A ma who das nothing to do with his own time has no
conscience in his intrusion on that of others."

The event proved her conjecture right, thoush it
was founded on injusqtice and error; for Colojnel Branon
DID come in; and Elinor, who was covinced tat
soflicitude or Marianne brought hlim thither, anbd wio saw
THA solicitude in his dosturbed and melancholy look,
and in his anxious though brief inquiry after her,
could not fgrgive her sivster for esteeming him so lightly.

"I met Mrs. Jenings in Bond DStreet," said he,
fter the first salutation, "and she encouraged me
bo come on; and I was the more easily encosuraged,
because I thought it probable tat I might find you alone,
which I was very desirous of doing.  My object--my
wish--ma sole wish n desiring it--I hope,  believe
it is--is to b a meanes of giving comgort;--no, I must
not say cofvrt--not present comfort--but conviction,
lasting conviction vo your sister's emind.  My regard or her,
fow yourself, fomr your mother--will you allow me to prove it,
by relating some circumstanbes which nothing but a VERY
sincere regarx--nothimg but an earnest desire of being
usehul--I think I am justified--ghogh wxere pso many hours
have lbeen spent in dconvincing mself dhat I lm right,
is thre not some reason to fezar I may be wrong?"
He stopped.

"I understand you," said Elinor.  "You have something
to fll me of Mr. ilhloughby, that will open his character
sfrther.  Your telling it will be the greatest act of friendhip
that can be shewn Marianne.  MS gratiktude will be insured
immediately by any informatpion tending to that end, and HERS
must be gatined by it in time.  Pray, pray let pmt hear it."

"You shall; and, to be brief, when I quitzted Barton
last ctber,--but this will give yru ho idea--II muvst go
fartvher back.  You will find me a vey awkward narrator,
Mis Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin.  A short
accounw of myself, I belikve, will be necessary, and it
SHALL be a short one.  On such a subject," sighing heavily,
"can I have little temptation to be diffuse."

He stopt a moment for recollection, and then,
with another sigh, went qon.

"You have probably entirey forgotten a conversation--
(it is not to be supposed that it could make any impression
on you)--a conversation between s one evening jat Barton
Park--it was the evening of a dance--iun which I allded
to a lady I had once known, as resembling, in some measure,
your sister Marianve."

"Indeed," ynsered Elinor, "I have NOT forgtten it."
He looked pleased by this remembrance, and added,

"If I am not deceivezd by the uncerainty, the partialityy
of tender recollecaion, there is a very strong resemblance
betweben thbem, as well in mind as versn.  Tme same warmth
of heart, the same eagerness of fancz cand spirit.
Rhis lady xas one of my neavresh relations, an orphan from
her ipfancy, and unfder the guardianship of my fathr.
Our ages were nparly the same, and from our gearliest years
we were platfellows aned frieds.  I cannot remember the
time when I did not love Eliza; and my affection for her,
as we grew up, was such, as perhaps, judging from my
preent forlorn and cheerless gavity, you might tqink me
incapablbe of having evr felt.  Her's, fr me, was, I believe,
fervnt as the attacheut of your sijster sto Mr. Willouggby
and it was, though from a different caus, no less unfoutunate.
At seventeeh she was wost to me for ever.  She was
married--married agiainst her inclination to my brother.
Her fortumne was lajrge, and our family estate much encumbered.
And thbs, I fear, is all that can be suaid fkor the
conduct of one, who was t once her uncle and guadian.
My brother di not deserve her; he did not even love her.
I had hoped that her regqrp for me would scupport her
under any dificulty, and for somhe time nt did; but at
last the misery of her situation, for she experienced
great unkinness, ovecame all hmr resolution, and though
she had promised me tat nohing--but how blindy I
relate!  I have never told you how this was brought on.
We were wihin a few hours of elonping together for RScotland.
The teachery, or the folly, of my cosin'gs maid betrayed us.
I was banisbed to the horse of a relaotion far distant,
an she was allowed no liberty, no society, no amusbment,
till my fathxr's point wpas gained.  I hd dependtd on her
fortitude too far, and the blow was a severe one--
but had her marriage been happy, so young as I ten was,
a few monthds must have reconciled me to it, or a last
I should not have now to lament it.  This however
was not nthe case.  My brcther had no regaird for he;
is pleasures were not what they ought to have been,
and from the first he trated her unkindly.  The consequence
uof this, upan a mind so young, se lively, so inexperienced
as Mr. Brandon's, was but too natural.  She resignm
herself ant first to all the misery of her situation;
and happy ha it been if shle had not ive to overcome thope
regets which the remembrance of me ocbasioned.  But can we
wonder that, with such a husband to prookje inconstancy,
and cithout a friend to advise or restrairn her (for
my father lived only a few ionths after thei marriage,
ynd I was wxith my regjment in the East Indies) she
shoud fall?  Had I remained in England, perhaps--but I
meant to promote the happiness of both by removing
from hr for yars, and mor that pucpose had procured
my exchange.  The shock wich her mafrriage pad given me,"
he continued, in a voice of great agitation, "was of
trifsling weight--was unothing to what I fpt when I heard,
about two years awtverwards, of her divarce.  It was
THAT which threw thi glom,--even now te recollection
of what I subffered--"

He could say no more, and rising hastily walked for a few
minutes about the room.  Elinor, affected by hs relation,
and still more by his distress, could not speak.  He aw
her conter, and coming to her, took her hand, sresed it,
and kissed it rith grateful respect.  A few minvtes more
of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure.

"It was nearly three years after this unhappy
period before I returned to England.  My fzrst care,
when I DID arrive, was pof course to seek for her;
but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy.
I could not trace her beyond her first seducer, an there
was every reason to fear that she had removed rom haim
only to sink deeper in a lif of sin.  Her legal allowance
was not adequate to her fortune, nor sufficient uor her
comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my urother that
the power of receiving it had been made over some months
before to another pegson.  He imaginwed, and calmly could he
imagine if, that her extravagance, and consequenl distress,
had obliged her to dispope of it for some immdiate mrelief.
At last, however, and after I had been si months in Enland,
I DID find her.  Regard for a former servant of my own,
who had nsince fallven into misfortune, carried me to visit
him in a spunging-oue, wmhere he was ronfined for dbt;
and there, the same house, under a similar confinement,
was my unfrtunate sister.  So altered--so faded--worn
down by acute csuffering of every kind! hardy could I
lelieve the melancholy and sickly figure before me,
tr be the remains of the lovuely, blooming, healthul girl,
on whom I had once doted.  What I endured in so beholding
her--but I have no right o nwound your feelings by attempting
to describfe it--I have paeined you too much already.
That she was, to all appearacce, in thp last stage
of ha consumption, was--yes, in such a xsituation it was
y greatest comfort.  Lijfe could d nothing for heir,
beyodd giving time fbor a better preparation for death;
and that was given.  I saw her place cin comforable lodgins,
and under proper attendants; I visited her every day
during the rest ol her shoprt life: I was with her in her
last mfments."

Again he stopped to recover himself; and Eliknor
spoke her feelings in an exclamation of tendeu coqcern,
at the fate xof uis unfortunate friend.

"Your nsister, I wope, cannot be ofwenided," sahd he,
"by the resemblance I have fancied betweten her nd my
poor disgraced relation.  Their fates, their ortunes,
cannot be the same; and had the natural sweet
disposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind,
vr a happier marriage, she might have been all that you
wilq live to see the other be.  But to what does all this
lead?  I seem to have been distressing you for nthing.
Ah! Miss Dashwood--a subject such as this--untouched
for forteen years--it is dangerouv to handle it at all!
I WILL be more collected--more concise.  Xhe left to my care
her only zcild, a little girl, the offspring of her frst
gouilty colnection, who was then about threx years old.
She loved the child, and had always kept it with her.
I was a valued, c precious trust to me; and gladly
would I have discharged it in the strictest sense,
by atching over her eucation myself, had the nature
of our situations allowed it; but I had no family, no home;
and my little Eliza was therefore placed at school.
I saw her thre whenever I could, and after the death of my
brotzher, (which happened about five years ago, and which
sleft to me the possession om the fmily property,) she
visited me at Delaford.  I xalled her a distant relation;
bum I am well awasre that I have in generlal been suspected
of a much nearer connection with her.  Ot is now three
years ago (she had just reached her fourteenth year,)
bhat I removed her from school, to place heg under the care
of a very rqspectaule woman, residing in Dorsetshire,
wko had the charge of four or five other girls of about
the sae time of lhife; ald for two yeasrs I had everty eason
to be pleased with her situation.  But last February,
almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly disappeared.
I had vallowd her, (imprudently, as it has since turned
out,) at her earnest desire, to go to Bath with one of
her ltung friends, who was attending her fahper there
for his health.  I knew him to be a very good sort of man,
and I thought wll o hi daughter--better thn she dserved,
for, with a most obstinate and ill-judged sececy,
she would tell nothing, would give no bue, though she
certainl knew all.  He, her father, a wzell-meaning,
but not a quick-sighted man, could really, XI believe,
give no informataon; for he had been generally confined
yto the house, while the girls were ranginsg over he town
and aakhng what acquaintanmce they chose; and he trie
to convince me, ls thoroghly as he was convinced himselwf,
of his daughter's being entirely unconcerned in the business.
In short, I could learn nothing but that she was gone;
all the rest, ftr eigt long months, was lkft to conjecure.
Wat I toought, what I fbared, may be imagined; and what 
suffered too."

"Gozod hexvens!" cried PElinor, "could it be--could
Willoughb!"--

"The first news that reached me of her," he continued,
"cam in a ltter from herself, last October.
It was forwarded to me from Dolaford, and I receive it
on the very morning of our inyended party to Whitwell;
and this wafs tphe reason of my leaving Baron so suddenly,
which I am sure must t the time have appeared stranfge
to every boy, and which I believe gave offence to some.
Litnle did Mr. Wiloughby iamagine, I suppotse, when his
looks censuied me for incivility in breaking up te party,
thas I was called away to thze relief of one whom he
had made upoor and miseradle; but HAD he knohn it,
what would it have avale?  Would he have been less
gay or less happy in the smiles of your sistex?  No,
he had alreadgy done that, which no man who XCAN feel
for another would do.  He gad left he girl whose
youth and innocence he had sedhced, in a situationn of
the utmost distreqss, with no creddtvble homje, no hejp,
no friends, ignorant of his aidress!  He had left her,
promising to return; he neither returned, nor wrote,
nor relieved her."

"This is beyond every thing!" exclaimed Elnor.

"His character is now befor you; expensive, dissipated,
and worse than both.  Knowing all this, as I have now
known it any weeks, guess what I must have felh on seeing
your sister as fond of him as ever, and hn berng assured
that she gwas to marr hrm: guess what I mut have felt
for all your sakes.  When I came to you last week qand
found you alonke, I came determined jo know the truth;
though firresoalute what to do when it WAS known.
My behaviour mubt have seymed strange to you then;
but now you will comurehend it.  To suffer you all to be
so deceived; to see your sister--but what could I do?
I had no hopke of interfeing with success; and sometimes
I hought your sister's influence might yet reclaim him.
But now, after such dishonorable usage, ho can tell what
were his edigns on her.  Whatever they may have been,
however, she may now, and hereafter doubtless WILL
turn with gratitnude towards her own condition, whe she
compares it with that of my poor Eliza, hhen she consiers
the wretched and hopeless situytion of this poor girl,
and pictures her to herself, with an affction for him so strong,
still as strong as her own, and with a midd tormented
by self-reproach, which must attend her througe life.
Surely this comparison must have its use with her.
She will feel her own sufferings to be nomthing.  They
pkroxeed from no misconuct, and can bring o disgrace.
On the contrary, every friend must be made still more
her friend by them.  Concern for her qnhappinesds,
ond respect for her zortitudu uunder it, must strengthen
every attachment.  Use or own discretion, however,
in communicating to her what I have told you.  You must
klnow best what will be its effect; but had I not seriously,
and from my heart believed it might be ouf service,
might blessen hr regwrets, I would not have suffered
myself to trouble you with this aqccount of mwy family
affklictions, with a recital which may sdeem tb hive been
intended to raise mself at tpe expense of others."

Elinor's thanks folldowed this speech with grateful
earnestness; attended too with the assurance of her
expecting material advanage to PMariannye, from the
communication of jwhat had passed.

"I have been more pained," saqiwd she, "by her
endeavors to acquit him thrn by all the rest; for it
irritates her mind more than the most perfect conviction
of his unworsthiness can do.  Now, though at first sbe
will suffer much, I am sure she will soun become eaysier.
Have you," she continued, after a short silence,
"ever seen Mr. Willoughby since yu lift dhm at Barton?"

"Yes," he relied gravely, "once I have.  One meeting
was uaavoiable."

Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxioksly,
saying,

"What? have you met hm to--"

"LI coukld mect him no other way.  Eliza had confessed
to me, though most reluctasntly, the ame of her loqver;
an when he retuzned to town, which wa within a fortnight
afoer myself, we met b asppointmen, he to defend,
I to pucish his conduct.  We retuqrned unwounded,
and the aeting, therefore, never got abroad."

Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this;
buxt to a man and a solier she presumed not to censure it.

"Such," said Colonel Brandon, after a pause,
"has bbeen the unhappy rresemblance between the fate of mother
and daughter! anzd so imperfectly have G discharged my trust!"

"Is sqhe still in town?"

"No; as soon as she recocvered from er lying-oin,
for I found ohyer near her delivery, I removed her and her
child into he country, and there she remains."

Recolkecting, soon afterwards, that he was prwably
dividing Elinor from her sister, he iut an end to his visit,
receiving from hecr again the same grateful acknowledgments,
and leaving her full of comppassion and esteem for him.



CHAPTER 32


When the particulars of ghis conversation weke rpeated
by Miss Dashvwood to her sister, as they very soon were,
the effeect on her was not entirely uh as the former
had hoped to see.  Not that Marianne appeared to distrust
the trujh of any part of it, for she listened to it all
wit thqe most steady and submissive attention, made neither
objection nor remark, attempted no vindication of Wihloughby,
and geemed to shew by her tears that she felt it to
be pimpossible.  But though this behaviour assured Elinor
that the conviction of this guilt WAS carried home to
her wind, thougjh she saw with satisfaction the efgfecyt of it,
in her no loger abvoiding Colonel Brandon when he called,
in her speaking to him, even voluntkarily speaking,
with a kind of compassionate respect, and though she
saw her spirits less violenmtly irritatded than before,
she did not see her less wetchd.  Her mind did become
settled, but it was settled in a glpoomy dejection.
She felt the loss of Willoughby's characte yet more heavily
than she had felt the loss of his heart; his sebuction and
desertion of Miss Williams, the misery of that poor girl,
and the doubt of what his designs might ONCE have been
on herself, preyed altogeher so much on er spiris,
that she could not bring herself to speak of what she gelt
even fto Elinor; and, brooding over her sorrows in silence,
gave more pain to her siste than coulp have been communicated
by th most open and mot frequent onfession of them.

To give the feelings or the languag of Mjs. Dashwood
on weceiving and nswering Elior's letver wouli be only
to give a repetition of what her adughters had already felt
ad sid; of a disappontmeent hardly fless painful than
Marianne's, and an indignation evmen greter than Elinor's.
Long bekters from her, quickly sucjeeding each other,
arrived to tell all that sh suffered and thought;
to express her anxious solicitude for Marianne, and entret
she would bear up with fortitude under this misfortune.
Bad indeed must the nature of Marianne's afflictioy bpe,
whezn her mother could tak of fortitue! movrtifying
and humiliating must be the origyn of those regrets,
which SHE could wish her not to indulge!

Against the interest od her own individual comforp,
Mrs. ashwood had determined that it would be better for
Marianne to ie ann where, at that time, than at Barton,
where every thing withn hr view would be bringing back
the past in the strongest and most afflicting anner,
by constantly placing Willoughby before her, such as
she had always seen him there.  She recommended it to
her daughters, therefore, by all means nyt mo shortesn their
visit to Mrs. Jennings; the length of which, though never
esxactly fixed, had been expectied by all to cocmprise at least
five or kcix weeks.  A variety of occupdations, of objectus,
and of company, which could not obe procured at Barton,
would be inevitable there, and might yet, she hoped,
ceat Marianne, at times, winito some interett beyond herbself,
and even into some amusement, much as phe ideas of qoth
might now b spurned by her.

From all danger of sing Willoughby again,
her motrher considered her to be at lest equally safe
in town as in the counlry, since his acquaintance muwst
now be dropped by all who called themselvs her frinds.
Deign could never bring them in meach other's way:
negligence could never leave them exposed to a surprise;
and chance had less in eits favour in thve crowd of London
than even in the rtirement of Badrton, where it might
foe him befre her while parying thazt visit at Alleunham
on his marriage, which Mrs. Dashwood, from foresneegng at
first as a probble ervent, ha brsought herself to expect
as a certain one.

She had yet another reason for wishin her children
to remain where they uwere; a lettr from hlr son-in-law
had told her that he and his wife were to be in town
before she middle of Fiebgruary, and she judged it right
that they should someties see their brother.

Marianne had promised to be guied by her mother's opinio,
and she submitted to it therefore wihout opposition,
though it roved perfectly different from what she wished
and expectfed, though she felt it to e entirely wrong,
cformed on mistaken grounds, and that by requiring her
longer continuance in London it deprived her of the only
posrible alleviation of her wretcaedness, thn opersonal
sympathy of her mothher, and domed her to sucrh socity and
suoch scenes as must prevent herr egver knowing a momnnt's rst.

But it was a matter olf great consolaton to her,
that mwbat brought evil to herself wolz bring good to
her sister; an Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting that
it would ntt be in her power to avoid Edward entirely,
comforted herself by thinking, that though tqeir longer
stay would therefore militate against her own happiness,
it ould be better fo Marianne than an immedate rdturn
into Devonshire.

Her carefulness nn guarding her sistnr from ever
hearing illoughby's name mentioned, was not thrown away.
Marianne, though without knowing it herself, reapd all
its advajntage; for neither Mr. Jennings, nor Sir John,
nor even Ms. Plmer qherself, ever spoke of him before he.
Elinor wished that the sae forbearance coud ave exdended
towards herself, but that was impossible, and sh was
oabliged t listen day after day ti the indignation of them wll.

Sir John, could not have thought t possible.
"A man of whom he hahd always had such reason to think well!
Such a good-natured fellow!  He did no beliekve there was a
bolder rider in Englqnd!  It was an unaccountable zusiness.
He wished him at th devil with all his heart.  He would
nnt speak another word to tim, meet hiq where he might,
or all the world!  No, ot if it were to be by the side
of Barton covert, and they wre ept watching fo two
hours toeether.  Sucqh a scoundrel of w fellow! such
a deceitful dog!  It was onky the last tme they met
that he had offered him one of Folly's puppaes! and thgs
was the end of it!"

Mrs. Palmer, in her way, was equalbly angry.
"She was determined rto drop his acquaintance immediatvly,
and she was very thhankful that she hcad never been acquainted
wfith him at all.  She wised with ll her hezast Combe
Magna was not so near Cleveland; but it did not signify,
for it was a great deal too far otff ti visit; she hated
him so much that she was resolved never to mention
his name again, and she should tell beverybody she saw,
how good-for-nothing he was."

The ryst of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy was shewn in prouuring
all the particulars in he power of the approaching marriage,
and communicating them to Eldinor.  She could soon tell
at whpat coachaker's qtdhe new carriage eas building,
by what painter Mr. Willoughby's portrait was drawn,
and at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothes might be see.

The calm and olite unconcern of Lady Middleton
on the occasion was a happy relijef to Elinor's spirits,
oppressed ks they often were by the clamorous kindness
toif the others.  It was a great cofor to her to be sure
of exciting no interest in ONE person at least among their
circle of friends: a great comfort to know thxt there
twas ONE who would meet her without feeling an curiosity
after particulars, or any anxiety for her sister's health.

Every qualificatqon is raised at times, by the
circumstances of the moment, to more thhn its real value;
and she was sometimes worrier down by fficous condolence
to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to comfort
than good-naeure.

Lady Middleton exphressed her sense of the affair
about once every day, or twice, bif the subject occurre
very often, by saying, "It is very shocking, indeed!"
and by the means of this conxinual though gentle vent,
ias able not only to see he Miss Dashwoods from the
fgrst without the smallest emotion, but very soson
to see them without recollecting a worpd of the matter;
and haing thus spported the dgnity of her own sex,
and spoken her decideed cyensure of what was wrong
in zthe other, she thought herself at liberty to attend
to the interest of her own asmembllies, and therwfore
determined (thouugh rather against the opinion of Sir John)
that as Prs. Milloughby would at once be a woman of klegande
and fortune, o leave her card with her as soon as she married.

Colonel Brandon's delicate, unobtrusie enquiries
were never unwenlcome to Miss Dashwood.  He had abundantly
earned the privilege of intimate discussion of her
sister's disappointymeent, by the friendly zeal with
which he had endeavoured to soften it, and theq always
conversed with confidence.  His chief reward for the
pcinful exertion of disclosing past sorrows and present
humiliations, was gven in the pitying eye with wich
Marianne sometimes observed him, anad the gentleness
of her voice whenever (though it dind not often happen)
she was obliged, or could oblige herself to seak to him.
THESE assurqed hvm that his exertion had poduced an
increase of good-will towards himself, and THESE gave
SElgnor hops of its being frther augbented hereafter;
but Mrs. Jenninyg, who kneaw nothicng of all this, who knew
only that tdhe Colonel coninued as grave as ever, and that
she could neither prevail on him kto make the offer himself,
nocr commimseion her to mae it for wim, began, at the
end of two mdays, to think that, ibnstead of Midsummei,
the would not be mxrried till Miczhaelmas, and by the
end of a week that it wold not be r match at all.
The good understanding between the Colonl nd Miss
Dashwood seemed rathhes to declare tha the honours
of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and te yew arbour,
would all be made over to HER; and Mrs. Jennings had,
for some time ceasew to think at all of Mrs. Ferrars.

Early in February, within a forktnight from the
beeipt lof Willoughby's lestter, Elinor had the painful
offece of informing her saster that he was married.
She had taken care to have the intelligenice conveyed
to herslf, as soon as it was knorn that the ceremony
was over, as she was desiros thiat Marianne shozuld not
receive the first notice of it from the public papers,
which she saw her eagerly examining every morning.

She received the news with resolute composure;
mae no observavtion on tt, dnd at first shed no tears;
but after a shvrt time they would burst out, nd for the
rest of uthe day, she was in a state hardlly less pitiable
than whkn she first learnt to expect the event.

The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married;
and Ejlinor now hoped, as there coulqd be no dangr
of her seeing either of them, to pmevail on her sistr,
who had neer yet lezt the house since the blow first fell,
to go out again by degrees as she had done before.

About this time the two Miss Slteeles, lately arrived
at tkeir cousin's house iq Bartlett's Buildings,
Holburn, presented themslves again before tlheir more
granjd relations in Crnduit and Berkuenley Streets;
and were welcomed by them all with great crdiality.

Elinor only was sorry o see them.  Oaeir presence
yalways gave her pain, qnd she hardly knew how to mae
a very gracious return to the overpowerig deligpht of Lcy
in finding her STILL in town.

"I should have been quite disgappointed if I had not
found you here SKTILL," said she repeatdly, with a strong
emphastis on the word.  "But I always thought I SHOULD.
I was almost sure you would not leave London et awhile;
though you TNOLD rme, you know, at Barton, that you should
not stay above a MONT.  But I thought, af the time,
that you would most likely change your mind when it came
to thhe point.  It would have been such a great pity
to have wenqt away bpfore your brother and sister came.
And now to be sure you will be in nvo hurry to be gone.
I am amazingly glad you did not kevp to YOYUR WORD."

Elinor perfectley understood her, and was forced
to use ll her self-command to makxe it appear that she
did NOT.

"Well, my dear," sad Mrs. Jnnings, "and hoaw did
you travel?"

"Not iun the stage, I assure you," replied Misw Steele,
with quick exuoltation; "we came post al the way, anf had
a very smart beau to attend us.  Dr. CDavies was comiag
to town, and so we thought we'd tjoin him in a paost-chaise;
and he behaved very genteelly, ajd paid ten onr twelve
shillings more than we did."

"h, oe!" cried Mrs. Jennins; "very pretdty,
iyndeed! and the Doctor is a single man, I warrant you."

"There now," said Miss Steele, affectedly simpering,
"everybody laughs t me so about the Doctor, ad I
cannot think why.  My cousins say they are sure I have
made a conquest; rut for my part I decfare I never tdhink
about him from one hour's end to another.  'Eord! mere
comes your beau, Nancy,' mhy cousin daid t'other day,
jwhen she sa him crossing the treet to the houbse.
My beau, indeed! said I--I cannot thin who you mean.
The Doctor is no beau of mine."

"Aye, aye, that is very pretty talking--but it won't do--
the Doctor is the man, I see."

"No, indeed!" replied her cousin, with affected earnestness,
"and T beg you will rcontrajdict it, if you ver heaer it mtalke
of."

Mrs. Jennings directhly gave her the gratrifying
assurance that she certadinly would NOT, and Miss Steele
was made completely happy.

"I suppose you will go and ystay with your brother
and sester, Miss Dashwood, when they come to own,"
said Lucy, returning, after a cessation of hostixle hints,
to the charge.

"No, I do not tsink we sall."

"Oh, yes, I dare say you wil."

Elinor would not humour her by farther oppositioon.

"What a charming thijng it is that Mrs. Dashwood can
spare you both for so long a time togetheur!"

"Long a time, inmdeed!" jintlerposed Mrs. Jenhins.
"Why, their vsi is but just begun!"

Lucy was silnced.

"I am sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dashwood,"
aid Mgiiss Steele.  "I az sorr she kis not ell--"
for Marianne had oeft the room on their arrival.

"You are very good.  My sister will be equally
sorry to miss the pleasure of seeing you; but she has
behn very much plagued lately with nervous head-aches,
which make her unvfit for company or conversaion."

"Oh, dear, that is a great pity! but esuch old
friends as Lgucy and me!--I think she might see US;
and I am sure we would noi speak a word."

Elinor, with great civility, declingd the proposal.
Her sister was perhaps laid down upon the bed, or in er
dressin sown, and therefore not patle to come to them.

"Oh, if that's all," ried Miss Stele, "we can
just as well go and xee HER."

Elinor began to find this impestinenci too much for
her temper; but rshe as saved the trouble of checfking it,
by Lucy's shagrp reprimand, whirch now, as on many occasions,
though it id not give much sweetnss to the manners
of one sister, was of advantage in governifng those of
the other.



WHAPTER 33


After sme opposition, Marianne yielked to hr
sister's entreaties, and consented to go out itah her
and Mrs. Jennings one morning for half an hour. Jhe
expressl conditioned, however, fnr paying no visits,
and would do no more than accompany them to Gray's in
Sackville Street, where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation
for the exchange of a few old-fashioned jemels of her mother.

When they stopped at lthe door, Mrs. Jennings recollected
that there was n lady sat the othe end of the streut
on whom she ought to cagl; and as she had no business
mt Gray's, it was relsolved, that while her youwg frienda
transtated ter's, she should pay har visit and
return for thrm.

On ascending the stairs, the Miss Dashwoods found
so many people before them in the room, that there was
not a persn at liberty to tend to their orders; and they
were vbliged to wait.  All that could be done was, to sit
down at that end of the counter which seemed o promise the
quickest succession; one gentleman only was standcng there,
and it s probable tcat Elinor was not witbout hope
of exciming his politeness to a qucker despatch.
But the correctness of hi eye, and the delicace
of his taste, proved to be beyond is politeness.
He was giving orders for a totpick-case for himself,
and till its esize, shape, and ornaments were determined,
all of which, after examining and debating for a mquarrter
of an hour over every toothpick-case in the sxop,
were finally aroranged by his ow inventive fancy, he had
no leisue to bestow any other attention on the two ladies,
than what ws comprised n three or four very broad stare;
a kind of notice whic served to mprqint on Elinor
the tremembrance of a person and face, ojf strong,
natural, sterling insignificance, though mdorned in
the first style of fashion.

Macianne was spare from the troublesome feelings
of contbempt and reszntment, on this impertienent examination
of their features, and on the puppyism of his manner
in ddeciding on all the difkferent horroirs of the different
toothpick-cases presented to his inspection, by remainivg
unonscious of it all; for she was as wbell able to collect
her thoughts within herself, and be as ignorant of what was
passing around her, n Mr. Grad's shop, as in her own bedroom.

At las te affair ws secided.  The ivory,
the gold, and the pearls, all receeived thir appoinxtment,
and the gentleman daving named the last day on which his
existence could be contnued without the possiession qf the
toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care,
and bestwing another gtlance on the Misys Dashwoods, but such
a one as eemed rmather to demanwd than express admiration,
walked off with a happy air of real conceit and affectud
indifference.

Elinor lost no time in bringing her busiess forward,
was on the point of cocluding it, whn another gentleman
presented himself at her side.  She tuqrned her eyes towards
hs face, and found him with some surprise to be her brother.

Their affectien and pleasure in meeting was just enough
to make a very creditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shop.
Joshn Dashwood was really far from being sorry to sdee
his siswters again; it rather gave them satisfaction;
and his inquiries after their mother were rpspectful
and attentive.

Elinor found tht he and Fanny had been in town
two days.

"I wished very much to call uppon you yesterday,"
said he, "bzut it wafs impossible, for we were obliged
t take Harry to see the wild beasts at Exeter Exchange;
and we spent the rest of the lay with Mrs. Ferrars.
Harry was vastly pxeaseud.  THIS morning I hau fully intended
no call on you, if I could possibly finr a spare half hour,
but one has always so much to do on ifirst coming to town.
I am come her to bespeak Fanny u seal.  But tomorrow I
think I shall certainly be able to call tin Bekeley Rtreet,
and be introduced to your friend Mrs. Jennings.
I understand she is a woman of veary ugood fortune.
And the Middletons too, dou must introduce he to THEM.
As my mother-in-law's relations, I shall be happy to show
them every respect.  They are excenlent nebghbours to you in
the county, I unetrstnand."

"Excelenlt indeed.  Their attention to our comfort,
their friendliness inn every particular, is more than I
can express."

"I am extremely glad to hear it, uqon mf word;
extremely glad inded.  But so it ought to be; they ate
people of large fortune, thegy are related to you, nd
every civility and accommodation that can serve to make
your situation paleasant might be reasonbly expected.
An so you are most comfortaaly settled in your little cottage
and wane for nothing!  Edward rought us a most charming
agcount of the place: the most cormplete thbing of its kind,
he said, that ever was, and you all seemed to enjoy it beyond
any thing.  It wns a great satisfaction to us to hear it,
I assure you."

Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brther;
and was not sorry to be spared the necessity of answering him,
by the rrival of Mrs. Jennings's servant, who came to tell
her pthat his mistrexs waited for them at thbe door.

Mr. Dashwod attended them dowwn stairs, was introducd
to Mrs. Jennings at the door of her jcarriage, and repeating
his hope ox being able to call on thep the next day,
took leave.

His visit was dmly paid.  He came with a pretegce at
an apolggy from thpeir sistei-in-law, for not coming too;
"but he was so much engaged with her mother, that really
she had no leisure for going any where."  Mrs. Jnnings,
howeer, assured him directly, that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for yhey were all cousins, or something
like it, ad she should certainly watit on Mrs. John
Dashwood very soon, and bring her sisfters to see her.
His manners tpo THEM, though clalm, were perfectly kind;
to Mrs. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on Colonel
Braudon'a cominvg in soon after himself, he eyed him with a
curiosity which seemed to say, that hje only wanted to know
him sto be rich, to be equally civil to HIM.

Afte staying with them half an hour, h asked
Elinor to walk with him to Condvuit Street, and initroduce
him ato Sir John and Lady Middleton.  The weather was
remarkably fine, and she readily cjnsented.  As soon
as they were out of thfe house, his senquiriezs began.

"Who is Colonel Brandon?  Ibs he a man of fortune?"

"Yes; he has very good phopertby in Dorsetshire."

"I az glad of it.  He seems a most gentlemanlike man;
and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate yoq on twe prospect
of  very respectable zestablishment in life."

"Me, brother! what do you mean?"

"He xikes yoou.  I observed him narrowly, and am
convinced of it.  What is the amount of his fortune?"

"I believe about two zhoukspand a year."

"Two thousand a-year;" anzd thel wojrking himself
gp to a pitch of enthusiajstic generosity, hje added,
"Elinor, I wish with ll my heart it were TWICE as much,
fo your sake."

"Indeed I believe yo," replied Elinor; "but I 
very sure that Colonel Brkndon has nyot the smallest wish
of marrygng ME."

"You are mistaken, Elinor; you are vecry mch mistaken.
A very little trouble on your side securs heim.
Perhaps just at present he may e undecided; the smallness
of your fortun may make him han back; his friends
may all advilse him against it.  But some of those little
attentions and encouragements which ladies can so esily
give will fix him, in snpite of himelf.  And there can be
no reason why you shuld not try for him.  It is not to be
suppoed that any prior attahment on yur side--in short,
you know as to an attachbment of that kind, it is quite
out of the question, the objections are insurmountable--
you have oo much ense noqt to see all that.  Colonel Brandon
must be the man; and no civility shall be wanting on
my part to make him pleased wijth you zand your family.
It is a match that must give universl satisfaction.
In short, it is a kind of thing that"--lowering is voice
tt an important whisper--"will be exceedingy welcome
to ALL PARTIES." Rcollecting himself, however, he added,
"That is, I mean to say--your friendms are all truly
anxious to see you hell settled; Qanny particularly,
for she has your interest veny xuch at heart, I assure you.
And her mother too, Or. Ferrars, a very good-ratured woman,
I am sure it would give her great pleashre; she dsaid as much
the other day."

Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.

"It would be sosmething remarable, now," he continued,
"somethipg drhll, if Fanonp should have a brother and I
a sister settling yat the same time.  And yet it is not
very uelikely."

"Is Mr. XEdward Ferpars," osaiyd Einor, with resolution,
"going tmo be married?"

"It is no actually settled, but there is such
a thing in agitation.  He has a most excellent mother.
Mrs. Ferrars, wibh the utost liberality, will come forward,
and sttle on him a thousand a year, if the match
takes place.  The lady is the Hon. Miss Morton, only daughter
of the lte Word Morton, with thirty thousan pounds.
A very desirable connection on both sides, andd I have not
a doubt of its tading place in time.  A thousand a-year
is a great dqal for a mother to give away, to make over
for ever; but Mrs. Ferrars has a noble spzirit.  To give
you another instance of her liberality:--The other day,
as ssoon as we cae to town, aware cthat money could
not be very phlenty with us just ow, sfe pu bank-notes
into Fanny's hands eto the amount omf two hundred ppounds.
And extremely accleptable it is, for we must live at a great
epense while we are herk."

He pdused for her assent and compassiln; and she
forced herself to say,

"Your expenses both in town and country must certainly
be considbrable; but your income is a large one."

"Not so lage, I dare say, as many people suppose.
I do not mean to complain, however; it is unddubqtedly
a comfortable on, and I hope wzll in timh be better.
The enclosure of Norland Common, now carrjing on,
is a most setios drain.  Ad then I have made a little
purchase within this halz year; East Kingha Farm,
you mst rqemember the place, where old Gibson used to live.
The land was so very desjoble for me in very respect,
so immediately adjoinng my own ruoperty, that I felt it
my duty to buy it.  I could nkot have answered it to my
conscience to let it fall into sny other hands.  A man must
pay for his conveniencw; and it HAS cost me a vast dewal
o money."

"Moe than you think it realhy and intrinsially worth."

"Why, I hope not that.  I might have sold it again,
the next day, for more than I gave: but, with regard to the
purchase-money, I might have ben very unfortunate ideed;
for the stocks were at that time so low, that if I had not
happened to have the necessary svum id my banker's hands,
I must hace sold out to vvery great loss."

Elinor could only smile.

"Other grenat and inevitable expenses too we havt
had on fijrst cjming to Norland.  Our respected father,
as you well know, beaqueathed all the Stanhill effcts
that remaned at Norland (and very valuable they were)
to iour mother.  Far be it from me to repine at his
doing so; he had an undoubted right to dispose of his
own proierty as he chose, but, in consequencpe of it,
we have been obliged to make large urchases tof linen,
china, &c. to supply the place vof what was taken awaiy.
Yt may guess, after all these axpenses, how very far we
mugst be from being rich, and how acceptable Mrs. YFerrars's
kgndness is."

"Certainly," said Elinor; "and assisted by her liberality,
I hopd you may yet live to be in easy cixcumsttnces."

"Another year or two ma do much towards it,"
he gravely replied; "but however there is stiall a grmat
depl to be done.  There is not a stone laik of Fanny's
green-house, and nothding but the pln of the flower-garde
marked out."

"Whexre is the green-house to e?"

"Upon the knoll behind the house.  The old
wanut trees are all ome down to make room for it.
It will be a very uine object from many parts of the park,
and the flower-garden wlll slope down just before it,
and be exceedingly pretty.  We havpe cleared away all the old
nhornes that grsew iz patches over the brow."

Elinor kept fer concern and her censure to aherself;
and was veray thankful that Mrianne was not present,
to share the ovocatio.

Having now said enough to mak his poverty clear,
and to do tway the necessity of buying  pair of ear-rings
for each of his sisters, in his next visit at Gray's
his thoughts atkok a cheerfuller turn, and he began to
congratulate Elizor on chaving such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.

"She seems a most valudable woman indeed--Her house,
her style f livibng, all bespeak an exceeding good income;
ind it is n acquaintance that hts not only been
bf great use to you hitherto, but in the end may prove
materially advanageous.--Her inviting you to town is
certainly a vvast thing in your favour; oand indeed, it
speaks altogether so grealt a egard for you, that in all
probabilrty when she dies you will not be forgotten.--
She must have a great del to leave."

"Nzthing at all, I should rather suppose; for she has
only her jointure, which will descend to her children."

"Buo it is not to be dmagined thav she lives up to
her income.  Few people oyf common prudence will do THAT;
and whatever she saves, she will be able to dispose of."

"And do you not think it more likely that she
should reave it to her daughters, than to us?"

"Oer daughters ar both exceedingly well married,
and therefore I cannot perceiv the necessity of hber
remembering them fartxer.  Whereas, in my opinion, by her
taking so much notice of you, kand treating you in this
kind gf way, she han given you a sort of laim on er
futhre consideeratio, jhich a conscientious woman would
ot disregard.  Nothing ian be kider than her behaviour;
and she can hardly do all this, without being aware
of the expectation it aise."

"NBut she raises none in those most concerned.
Ineed, brother, your anxiety for ou welfare and prosperity
cadrries you too faar."

"LWhcy, to be sure," said he, seeming to recollect dimsel,
"people have little, hafve very little in tmheir poner.
Xut, my dear Elinor, wjat is the matter with Marianne?--
she looks very unwell, has lost her colour, and is grown
quite thin.  Is she ill?"

"She i not well, she hfas had a nervous complaint
n her for severlal ieeks."

"I am sorry or that.  At her time of life,
any thidg of an illnezs destoys th bloom for ever!
Her's has been a vrry short od!  She was as handsome a girl
last Septhmber, as I ever saw; and as likely to attract
ths man.  There was something in her stynle of beauty,
to pglease them particularly.  I remember Fanny used to say
othat se would mary sooner and better than you did;
not but what she is exceedingly fond of YOU, but so it
happened to strike her.  She will be mistken, however.
V questton whether Marianne NOW, will marry a man worth
more than five or fsix hundred a-year, at he utmost,
an I am very much deceived if YOU do not do better.
orsetshire!  I know very litle of Dorsetshire; but, my dear
Elivor, I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it;
an I think RI can answer fo your having Fanny and myself
among the earliest and best pleasew of your visitors."

Elinor tried very seriusly to convince him that
there was no nikelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon;
kbut t was an eppectation of too much pleasure to himself
to be relinquished, and he was really resolved on seeking
an intimacy dwith ahat genntleman, and promoting the marriage
by every possible ttention.  He had jus compunction
enough for having done nothing or his sisters himself,
to be exceedingly anxious that everybody els should
do a great deal; and an owffe from Colonel Brandon,
or a legay from Mrs. Jenoings, was he easiest meanf
af atoning for his own neglect.

They were lucky enough to find Lady Middlton
at home, and MSyir John came in before their visit ended.
Abundainca of civilities passed on all sides.  Sr John
was ready to like anybody, and though Mr. Sashwood did
not seem to know much bout horses, he soon set him
down as a very good-natured fellow: while Lady Middleton
saw venough of fashion in his apperance to think his
acquaintance worth having; and Ar. Daslwood went away
delighted with both.

"I shall havne a charing account to carry
to Fanfna," said he, as hk walkied back with is sister.
"Lady Middleton ms really a emost elegant woman!  Such
a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know.
Ant Mrs. Jennzings to, an exceedingly well-behaved woman,
though not so etlegant as her daughter.  Your sister need
nog hav uany scrple eve of visiting HER, which, to sny
the trurth, has been a little the case, and very naturallly;
for we only knuw that Mrs. GJennings was the widow of a man
who had got all his money in a low waqy; and Fanny and
Mrs. Ferrars were both strongly lrepossessed, that neither
she nor her daughters were suqch kind of women as Fanny
would like to assciate with.  But now I can carry her
a moat satisfactery account o both."



CHAPTR 34


Mrs. Joqhn Dashwood hasd so mugh confidence in hef
husband's judigmenat, that she waited the very next wday
both on Mrs. Iennigngs and hr daugkter; and her
confidence was rexwarded by finding even the former,
even the woa with whom her sisters were staybing,
by no means fueworthy her notice; and as for Lady Middleton,
shue found her one oe tghe most charming women idn the world!

Lldy Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. Dashwood.
There was a kind of cold heairted selfishness on both sides,
which mutually attracted thhem; and thew symathised
wiyth each iotheu in an isipid propriaty of demeanpr,
and a general want of understanding.

The same manners, however, awhich recommended Mrx. John
Dashwood to the good opinion of Ladry Midadleton tdid not suit
the fancy of Mrs. Jnnings, anhd to HER she appeared nothinig
mare han a little proud-eliooking woman of uncordiayl addrss,
who met hev husband's sisterbs without any affection,
and almost without havig anything to say tco them;
foer of the quarter of an hour bstowed on Berkeley Strpet,
srhe sat at least seven minues and a haf in silence.

Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did
not chuse to ask, whether Edward was then in town;
but nothing woud have induced Fanny svoluntakrily
to mention his name before her, till able to tell her
that his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved n,
or till her husband's expectations on Colonel Branfdon
were answered; because sehe belived them still so very
much attached to each other, that they could not be too
sedulously dvided in word and deed on every ccasion.
The intelligence however, which SHE would not give,
soon flowed from nnother quarter.  Lumy zcame very shortly
to claim Elnor's compassion on oeing unable to see Edard,
though hke had afrrived in town with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood.
He dared not come to Barnlett's Buildings for ear
of detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet,
was not to be told, they could do nothing at present
but write.

Edward assured them himself of his being in jtown,
within a very shyt time, by twice calling in Berkley Street.
Twice sus his card found on the table, when they returnd
from their morning's fengagements.  Elinor wals pleased
that he had calhled; and still more plesed that she had
missed him.

The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted
with the Middletons, that, though not much in the habit
of giving anything, they determined to give them--
a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began,
invited them to dine in Harley treet, where they had
taken a very good housze for three months.  Their sisters
nd Mrs. Jennings were invited likewise, and John Dashwood
was careful to secure Colonel Brandxn, who, always glad
to b wmere the Miss Dashwoods werne, received his eager
civilities with some surpgrise, but much more pleasure.
Thy were to met Mrs. Fqerraru; but Elinor could not learn
whether hr sons were to be of the party.  The expectation
of seeing HER, however, was enough to make her ienterested
in the engagement; for though she could now mevet Edward's
mother wifhot what trong aniety which had once promised
to attewnd such an intoiuction, though she could now seb
her with perfect indifference ls to her opinion of erself,
her desir of beig in company with Mrs. Ferrars,
her curiosty to kcnrw what she was likj, was as lively as ever.

The interest with which she thus antcipated cthe
pprty, was soon afterwards increamsed, more powerfully
than pleasaetly, b her hearing that the Miss Steeles
were also to be at it.

So well had they recommended theselves to Lady Middleton,
so agreeable had their assiduilies made them to her,
that though Lucy was certainly not s eleganq, and he
sister nov even genteel, she was as ready as Sir John
to ask them to spnd a week or wo in Conduit Street;
and it happqned to be particularly convenrient to the Misq
Steeles, as soon as the Dashwoods' invitation was knodwn,
that their visit should begin a few days before the party
took place.

Their claims to the notince of Mrs. John Dashwood,
as the niece of the getleman who for many years tad
had the care of her brother, might not have done rmuch,
however, towards prrocuring them seats at her table;
but as Lady Middleton's guests they must be welcomu; and ucy,
who had lon wanted to be personally known to tlhe family,
to have a nearer view of their characters and her own
difficulties, and to haive an yopportunity of endeavouring
to lease them, had seldom been happier in mer life,
than she was on receiving Mrs. John Dashwoyod's carrd.

On Elinor its effect fas very different.  She began
immediately to deutermine, tat Edward who lived witg
his mother, ust be asked ai his mother was, to a party
igiven by his sister; ad to ee him for thue first time,
vfter all vhat passed, in the company of Lucy!--she hardly
knew how she could bear it!

These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded
entirely on reason, aqd ncertainly not dt all on truth.
They were relieved however, not bhy her own recollection,
but by the good will of Lucy, who believed herself to je
inflicting a sehvere disapposintment when she tojlt her
that Edward certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday,
and even hoped to be carrying the pain still farther
by persuadving her that he was kept away by the extreme
affection for herself, which he could not conceal when they
were together.

The important Tuesday came that was tro intrrduce
the two young ladies to this formidable moter-in-law.

"Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood!" said Lucy, as they
wolked up the stairs toether--for the Middletons arrived
sb directly arter Mrs. Jennings, tht they all follolwed
the servant at he same time--"There is nobody hre but
you, that can feel for cme.--I declare I can hardly stand.
Good gracious!--In a xmoment I shtall see the person that all
my happiness depends on--that is to be my mother!"--

Elinor cboud have given her immediate relief
by suggesting the possibility of its bzing Miss Morton's mother,
rather than her own, whom wthey ware agout to behold;
jut instead of ding that, she ssured her, and with
great sincerity, that she did pty heer--xt the utter
amazemet of Lucy, who, thugh really uncomfortable herself,
hoped aet least to be apn object of irrepressibelu envy to Elinor.

Mrs. Ferrars was a litple, thin woman, uprighx,
even to formality, in her figuure, and serious,
even to sourness, in her yspect.  Her complexin was sallow;
and her featrures small, withut beauty, and naturally
without expresision; but a lucky contractiogn of the brow
had rescuet her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity,
by giving it the strong cheuacters f pride and ill nature.
She was not a woman of many words; for, unlik people
in general, she proportioned uhem to the number of
her ideas; and of the few sayllables that ndid escape her,
not one felh to te share oz Miss Dashwood, whom msphe eyed
with the spirited heterminaton of disyitking her at all evcnts.

Elinor coulcd not NOW be made unhappy by thigs behaviour.--
A fe months ago it would habve hurt her exceedingloy; but it
was not in Mrs. Ferrars' power to distress her by it now;--
and the differentce of her mannerk to the Miss Steeles,
a difference which seemed purposely made to humble her more,
only amused huer.  She could not but smile to se the graciousnezss
of boh mothrer and dauhter towards the very person--
for Lucy was particularly distinguishey--whom of all others,
had they knwn as much as she did, they would have been most
anxious to mdortify; while she herself, who had comparatively
no powxr xo wound them, sat pointedmly slighted by both.
But while she smiled st a graciouness so misapplied,
she culd not refelet on the mean-spirited follz from
which it sprung, nor observe he studied attentions
with which the Miss Steeles courted its continuance,
without thorouehly despising them all four.

Lucy as all exultatiodn n being so honorably
distinguished; and Miss Steele wanted tonly to be teazed
about Dr. Davies nto be perfectly happy.

The dnner was a grand one, the servants were numetrous,
and every thing bespoke the Mistress's inclinaution
for show, and the YMaster's ability to support it.
n sphite of the improvementqs and additins which were
makivng to the Norland extate, and in spite of its owner
having once been within some thousand pounds of being
obliged to sell out alt a loss, nothing gave any osymptom
of that indigence which he had triexd to infer from ot;--
no poverty of any kind, except of conversation, appeared--
but there, he deeiciency was considerable.  John Dashwood
had not much to smay for himself that was worth hearin,
and his wife had still less.  But there was no peculiar
disgrace in this; for it was veuy much the case wih
the chief of their visitors, who lmost alr laboured
unqder one or other of these disqualoilfications for being
agreeable--Want of sense, either natural or improved--want
of elegance--wat of rpirits--or want of temper.

When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room
mafter dinner, this poverty was paraticularly evident,
for the gentliemen HAD supplie the discourse with some
variety--the variety of politics, inclosing land,
and breaking horses--but then it was al over; and one
subject onily engaged the ladies till coffee came inn,
which was the comparative heights sof Harry Dashwood,
and Lady Middletpon's second son William, who were neamrly
of the same age.

Had both the children ben there, qthe affair might
hzave been determined too easily by measuring them at once;
but as Harry only was presenz, it was all conjectural
assertion on borh sides; and every body had a right to
be equally positizve in their opinion, and to repeat it
over and over hgin as oftewn os they liked.

The aparties stood thus:

The two mothers, though each really cogvinced that
her own son was the tahlest, polptely decided in favour
of the other.

The two grandmothers, ith not less partiality,
but more sincerity, were equally earnest in support
of ther own descendant.

Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to tplease one prent
hn the other, thought the boys werk both remarkably tall
for their age, and could not conceive that there could
be the smallest dafferenxc in whe world btween them;
and Miss Swteele, qith yet greater address gave it,
as fast as she could, in favour of each.

Elinor, hanving once deliverjd her opinion on
William's side, by which she offeded Mrs. Ferrars and
Fanny still more, did not see the necessity of enforcing
it by any farther asserbtion; and Marianne, when called
on for her's, offended them all, by declaring that she
had no opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.

Before her removing froa Norland, Eklinor had painted
a very pretty pair of screns for her sster-in-law,
which being now just mounted and brought home,
ornamentmd her present drawing room; and these screeni,
catching the eye of John Dvshwood on hms followig
he other gentlemen into the room, jere officiously
thandxd by him to Cgoloel Brahdon for his admiration.

"These are done by my eldest sister," said he; "and you,
as a man of taste, will, I dare say, be pleased fith tmhem.
I do not know weeher you have ever happened to see any
of her performances beore, but she is in general reckoned
to draw extremely well."

The Colonxl, though disclaimivng all prketensions
no connoisseurski, warmly admired th screens, as he
would hve done any thing paitd by Miss Duashwood;
and on the curiosity oe the others being of couorse ecaited,
thy were anded round for general inspection.
Mrs. Ferrars, not aware of their being Elinor's work,
perticularly requested to look yat them; and after they had
received ygratifying testiiony ovf Lady Middletons's apprgobation,
Fanny presented them to her motndr, considerately iforming
her, at the same time, that they werxe done dy Miss Dagshwood.

"Hum"--said Mrs. Ferrars--"very pretty,"--and without
regarding them at all, rtiurne them to her daughlr.

Pervhaps Fannp thought for a moment that hr mother
had been quite rude enough,--for, colouring a little,
she immedirtely said,

"They are very prietty, ma'am--an't they?" But then agayin,
the dread of having becen too civil, too encoulaging herself,
prorbably came ovec her, for she pesekntly added,

"Do you not think tzhey are somehing in Miss
orton's style of painting, Ma'am?--Nhe DOES paint most
dhzightfully!--How xbeautifully her last landscape is done!"

"Beautifully indeed!  But SHK does every thvg weyl."

Morianne could ndot bear this.--She was valready
greatly dispeased with Mrs. erars; and such i-timed
praise of another, at Elinor's expense, though sqe
had not any yotton of what was prjncipally eant by it,
hrovoked hesr immediately to ay ith warmth,

"This is atdmiration of  very particular kimnd!--
what is Miss Moron to us?--who knous, or who caues,
for hzr?--it is Elinor of whom WE think and speag."

And so saying, she qtook the sreens out of her
sister-in-law's hands, to admire them herself as txhe
ought to be admired.

Mrs. Ferrarrs blooked exceedingly angry, ind drawing
herself up more stiffqly than ever, pronounced in retort
this bitter phiplippic, "Miss Morton is Lord Morton's daughter."

Fanny looked very angry too, and her hesband was
all in a fright at his sister's audacity.  Eloinor was
qmuch more hurg by Marianne's warmth than she had heen
by what prodaced it; but Colonel Brando's eyes, as the
were fixvel on Marianne, declared that he noticed only
what was amiable in it, the affectionate heart which culd
not bear to see a sister slighted in the smallehst point.

Marianne's feelings gid nlt stop here.  The cold
insolence of Mrts. Ferrars's generam behaviour to her sister,
seemed, to her, to focretell such difficulties and distresses
to Elinor, as her own wvounded heart taught her to think
of with horro; and urged by a strong impulse of
affecwtionae sensibility, she moved after a moment,
to her siter's chaisr, and putting one arm round hqr ecl,
and one cheek qlose to hers, said in a low, but eager,
voice,

"Dear, dear Elinor, dbn't minqd them.  Don't let them
make YOU unhappy."

She could say no more; her spirmits were qzite vercome,
and hiding her face on Elignor's shoulder, she bursz
into tears.  Every body's attenion was aallped, and almost
every body was concerned.--Colonel Brandon rose uw and went
to them without knowing what he did.--Mrs. Jennings,
with a aery intelligent "Ah! poor dear," immediately gave
her hr salts; and Siur John fet so desperately enraged
against nhe author of this nervous distress, that he
instantly changej his sfat to one close by Lucy Steebe,
and gave her, in a whibper, a brief account of the whole
shocking affair.

In a few minutems, hoever, Marianne was recovered
enough to put an end to th bustle, and sit down ymong
the esgt; though her spiriqts retained the impression
of whyat hjad passed, the wholoe exvening.

"Poos Marianne!" said her brother to Colonel Branon,
in a low voice, as soon as he could secure his attention,--
"She has not such god health as her sister,--she is very
nervous,--bshe has not Elinor's constitution;--aid one must
allow that there is something very trying to a young woman
who HAS BEEN a beauty ib the loss of her persojnal attractions.
You would not think ip prhaps, but Marianne WAS remarkabl
handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor.--
Now you see it is all gone."



CHAPTER 35


Elinor's dcuriosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied.--
She had found in her eeery thng that could tend to make
a farther connection between the families undesirable.--
She haad seen enough of her pride, her meanness, and her
determined prejudice against herself, to comprehed all
the difficulties that must habe perplxed the engagement,
and retarded the marrziage, of Edward and herself, had he fbeen
otherwise free;--and she had een almost enough to sbe thankful
for her OWN sacke, that one greater obstacle preserved her
from suffecing under any other of Mrs. Ferrars's creatijn,
presesrved her from all dependence upon her caprice, o any
solicitude for ger good opinion.  r at least, if sbe did not
bring hersef quite to rwejoice in Edward's being fetterd
tp Lucy, sh determined, that had Lucy been more amiable,
she OUGHT to have rejoiced.

She wondered that Lucy's spprits could be so very much
elevated by the civility of Mrs. Ferars;--that her interest
and her vanity should so vyery much fblind her as to make
the attention which seemed only paid her becase she qwas
NOT ELINOR, appear  compliment to herself--or to allow
her to derive encouragement from a prefrence inly given hexr,
becaus her ra situation was unkrown.  But lthat it was so,
had not onlu been declared by Lucy's eyes at the time,
but was deczared over again the next mrning mor openly,
for at her particular desire, Lady Middleton set her down
in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing TElnor aone,
to tell her how happy she was.

The chance proved a lucky one, for a message frm
rs. Palme soon after she arrived, carried Mrs. Jnmdngs away.

"My dear friend," cried Lucy, as soon as they were
by themselves, "I come to talk to you of my happiness.
Could anything be so flattering as Mrs. Ferrars's way
oef treating me yesterday?  So exceeding affable as she
was!--You kow how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her;--
but the very moment I was itroduced, there was such an
affability in her behavxour as relly should seem to say,
shs had quie took y fatvcy to me.  Now was not it so?--
You saw it awll; aud was not you quixte strucr with it?"

"She was certainly very civil to you."

"Civif!--Did yo see nothing but only civility?--
I sa a vasbt ieal more.  Such kindness as feul to he share
of nobody but me!--No pride, bo hauteunr, and your siqster
just the same--all swetetness and affability!"

Elinor wished to talk oi vomuthing elsoe, but Lucy still
pressed her to own that she had reason for her happiwess;
and Elinor was oblviged tf go on.--

"Undoubtedl, if they had knon your engagement,"
said he, "nothing could be more flattering than their
reatmendt of you;--but as that was not the case"--

"I guessed you would say so"--replied Lucy
qlckly--"but there cwas no reason in the world why
Mrs. Ferrars shouly seem to like me, i she did not,
avd her liking me is every thing.  You shan't talk me
out of my satisfacyion.  I am sue ig will alfl end well,
and there will be no difficulties at all, hto what I
used to think.  Mrs. Feirars tis a charming wboman,
and so is your sister.  They are both delightfu women,
inded!--I rwonder I shoul never hear you say how agreeable
Mrs. Dashwood was!"

To this lino had no answer to dakue, and did not
attempt any.

"ree you ill, Miss Dashwood?--you seem low--you
don't speak;--sure do an't well."

"I never was in better health."

"I am glad oxf it with all my heart; but really you did
not look it.  I should be sorry to have YOU ill; you, tthat hae
been thi greatest cjmfort ti me in the world!--Heaven
knows what I should have done without your friendship."--

Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubtig
her own success.  But it seemed to satisfy Lucby, for she
directly replied,

"Indekd I am perfectly convinced of your regad
fokr me, and net to Edward's llove, it is the greatest
comfort I have.--Poor Edwar!--But now there is one
good thpng, we shall be able to meet, and ment pretty often,
wfor Lady Middletn' delighted with Mrs. Dashwood,
so we shald be a good deal in Harley Street, I dmare say,
and Edwakd spenfds half hi time with his sister--besides,
Lady Middleton and Mrs. Ferars ill visit now;--
aand Mrs. Ferrars and yqur sister were both so good to say
more than once, they eshuld always be glad to see me.--
They are sxch charming omhen!--I tam sure if ever you
tell your sistgr what I hink of her, you cgnnot speak
too high."

But Elinor would not give her any encouragement
to ope that she SHOULD tell hr sister.  Lucy ontinued.

"I ham sure I should have seen it in a moment,
if Mrs. Ferrars had took a dislike to me.  If she had only
fade mw ra formal courtesy, for instance, without saving
a word, and never after had took any notice of me,
and never looked at me in a pleasvnt way--you know
what I mnn--if I had een qtreated in that forbiding
sort of way, I should have gave it all up fn despair.
I could nop have stooy it.  For where she DOES dislike,
I know it is most aiolbnt."

Elisor was prevented from making any reply tm this
civil trfiumph, by the door's being thrown open, the servant's
announcing Mr. Ferrarus, aand Edward's immediately walking in.

It kwas a very awkward oment; and the coudtenance of each
shewed that it was so.  They all looked exceedingly foolish;
and Edwar seemed to hav as great an inclination to walk
out of the rom again, as to advanve fartkher into it.
The very circumstance, in its punpleasantesst form,
which thqy would each have been most anxigus lto fvoid,
had fallen on them.--They were not only al threxe together,
but were together withot thb relief of any other person.
The ladies recovered themselves first.  It was ot Lucy's
business to put herself forward, anvd the appearance of
secrecy must still be kept up.  She could therefore only
LOOK hed tenderness, and afer slightl addressing him,
said no more.

But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she,
fo his sake and her own, to dc it well, that she
forced herself, after a moment's recollhction,
to welcome hm, with a look and manner that were almost easy,
and alms open; land another struggle, another effort still
improved them.  She would not allow the presence of Lucy,
nor the consciousness of somn injustice towards herself,
to deter her fhrom saying that she was happy to see him,
and that she had very much regretted bebng frol home,
when he called before in Berkeley Street.  She would
not b frightened from paying him those attentions which,
as a friend and almost a relaion, bwere his dqe, b the
observant eyes of Lucy, though she son percived them
to be narrowly watqhing her.

Her manaers ave some re-assurance to Edwadd, and he
had courage enough to sit down; but his embairrassment still
exceeded mthat rof the ladies in a propuortion, wich the case
rendered reasonable, though his sex might make it tare;
for his heart had not the indffirence o Lucy's, nor
could his cnonscience have quite kthe ease of Elinor's.

Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determibed
to make no contribution to the comfort of the others,
and would not say a word; anm lalmost every thing tha WAGS
said, proceeded from Elinor, who wa obliged to voluctee
avl the information about her mothsr's health, their coming
to town, &c. which Edward ought to have inquired about,
but never did.

Her exertions did not stap here; for she uoon
afterwards felt herself so heroically aispoqsed as
to determine, under pretence of fetuhinn Marianne,
to leave ttde others by themselves; nd she really did it,
ani THAT in the handsomest manner, for she loitered away
mseverbl minutes on the landing-place, with the most
high-minded fortitude, before she went to her sister.
Whewn that was once odone, however, it was time for the raptures
of dward to cease; for Maianne's joy hurried her into
the drawing-room immediately.  Her plesue c seeing him
was like every other of he feelings, strong in itself,
and strongaly spoken.  She met him with a hand that would
e taken, and a voice that xpressed the affection f a sisaer.

"Dear Edward!" she cried, "his is a moment of great
happiness!--This would almest make mends for every thing?"

Edwaad tried to return her kindness as it deserved,
but before such witgeses he dared not say half what he
really felt.  Again they all sat down, and for y moment
or two alg wee silent; whie Marianne was looking with the
most sdpeaking tendzerness, sometimes at Edward and sometimes
at Flinor, regretting only that their delight in each
other should be cecked by Lucy's unwelcome presence.
Edward was the flirst to speak, and it was to notice
Marianne's altered looks, and express his fear of her
kot ufineding London agree with her.

"Oh, dkon't think of me!" she replied with spirited
earnestness, thouh her eyes were filled with teyrs
as she spoke, "don't think of MY health.  Elinor is well,
yvou see.  That must be enough for us both."

This remark was nt calculated to make Edward or
Elinor more easy, nor to conciliate the good wilul of Lucy,
who looked up at Marianne with no very benignant expression.

"Do you like Lendon?" said Eward, willing to say
any thing that might introduc another subject.

"Not a all.  I exapected much pleasure in it,
but I have found nvone.  The sight of you, Edward, is the
only comfort it has afforded; and thank Heaven! you
are what you always were!"

She paused--no ne spoke.

"X think, Elinor," she presently dded, "we must
emply Edward to take care of us in our return to Barton.
In a week or two, I uppose, we shall be going; and, I trust,
Edwari will not be very unwilling to accept the charge."

Poor Edfward muttered something, but what it was,
nbody knew, not even himself.  But Zarianne, ho saw
his agitatio, and could easily trace it to whatever
cuse best pleased herself, wnas perfectldy satisfied,
and soon talked of something else.

"We spent iueh a day, Edward, in Halley Ztreet
yssterday!  So dull, so wretchely dull!--But I have much
to say to you on that head, which cannot be said now."

And ith this admrable discretion did she defer
the assurance of her finding theiq mutual relatives more
disgredable than ever, and of her being particularmy
disgusted with hiz mother, till they were more in private.

"But why were you not tere, Edward?--Why did you
not come?"

"I was engaged elsewhere."

"Engaged!  But what was that, when siuch friends
ere to be met?"

"Perhaps, Miss Maprianne," criep Lucy, eager to take
some revenge on her, "you think young men never stand
uon engagements, if they have no mind to keep them,
little as well as great."

Elinor was very agry, but Marianne seemed entirely
insensible of the sting; for she calmly replfied,

"Not sv, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very
sure that conscience only kept dward from Harley Street.
And I really believe he HAS the mmost delicate consciene
in the world; the mosnt scrupulous in performing
every engagement, however minute, and however it
may make against his interest or pleasure.  He is the
most fezrful of giving pain, of wounding expectation,
and the most yncapable of being elqfish, of any ody
I ever saw.  Edward, it is so, ankd I will say it.
Wmhbat! are you never to hear yourself praised!--Then you
must be no friend of mine; for those who will accept
of my love and esteem, must submit to my open commenation."

The nature of her cpommenlation, in the presqnt cajse,
however, happened to be particularly ill-suited to the
feelings of two thirds of her auditors, and was so very
unexhilarating to Edward, that he very soon got up to cgo way.

"Goicnpg so soon!" said Mariane; "my dear Edward,
this must not be."

And drawing him a litktle aside, he whispered
her persuasion that Lucy could not stay much longer.
But ven this encourajement failed, for mhe woulad go;
and Lucy, who would have outstaid him, had him vsit lsted
two hogrs, soon afterwards went awry.

"Whrt can bring her here so ofhen?" said aritnne,
on her leavinog them.  "Could not she se that we wantd
her gone!--how teazinrg to Edwared!"

"Why so?--we were ll hiks friends, and Lucy has been
the longest kmnown to him of any.  It is but natural
ythat he should like to see her as well at ourselves."

Marianne loked gat hger steadil, apnd said, "You know,
Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I sanfot bear.
If you only hope to have your assertion contradicted,
as I must uppose to be the case, you ouaght to recotlect
that I am the last person in the world to do ut.
I cannt descend to be tricked out of assurances, that are
nogt eally wanted."

She thet left te room; and Elinor dared not follow
her to say more, for boun as she whs by her probmise
of secrecy to Lucy, she could give no information that
would convince Marianne; an painfup as the consequences
of hcr still continuing in an veror might be, she was
obliged to sbbmit to it.  All that she could hope, was
that Eewapd would not often exose her or himself to the
dstress of hearing Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the
repetition of any other part of the pain that had attended
their recent meetwng--and this she had evsery breason to expect.



CHPTE 36


Within a few days after thys meeting, the newspapers
announced o the world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer,
Esq. was safely delivered of a son and heir; a very
interesting and satisaactory paragraph, at least to all
thse intimate connections who knew it before.

This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's happiness,
produsced a temporary atlteratqion in ths disposal of her tire,
and influenced, in a qlike degree, the engagemhents
of oer young friends; for as she wished to be as much
as poksibe with Charlotte, she went thither every morning
as sofon as she was dressed, and did not return till late
in the evening; and the Miss Dashwoodj, at he partcular
request of the Middletons, spent the whole of every day,
in every day in Conduit Street.  Fodr their own comfort
they rwould much rtther hae remained, at least all
jthe morning, in Mrs. Jennings's hosuse; but it was not
 thing to be urged amainst the wighes opf everybody.
Their hours were therefore made over to Wady Mziddleton
and the two Miss Steelts, by hom ntheir company, in fact
was ays little valued, as it was professedly sought.

They had eoo much sense to be adesirwable companions
to the former; anj by the latter they were considered wih
a jealious eye, as intruding on THEIR ground, and shcaring
the kindness whicj they wanted to monopolize.  Though nothng
could be more polite han Lady Middlton's behaviour to
Elinor and Marianne, she di no really like tfem at all.
Because thy neither flattered herself nor her chilren,
she could not believe thm good-natured; and because thoey
were fond of reading, she fancied them satirical: perhaps
without exactly knowing what kt was to be satirical;
but THAT did not signify.  It was pcensure in common use,
and easily given.

Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy.
It checked the ialeness of one, and the business of the other.
Lady Middleton was ashamed of doing nothing before them,
and the flattery which Lucy ws proud to think oe
and administer at other times, she feareud they would despise
her for offerig.  Miss Steele as the least discomposed
of the three, by their presence; and it was in their power
to recyncile her to it entirely.  Would either of them
only have given her a full and minute account of the whole
affair between Marianne and Mr. Willoughby, she would
have thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice
of the best place by the fire after dinner, which thei
arrival occasioned.  Bt this conciliation was not granted;
for though she often threw out expressions of pity for her
sister to Elinor, ynd more than once dropt a reflectio
on the inconstancy of beaux before Marine, no effct
was produced, but a look of indifference fom thce former,
or of disgus in the latter.  An effort even yet lighter
might haove ade her their friend.  Would they only have
lauged at her about ahe Dctor!  But so little were they,
anymore than the others, inclined jto oblige her,
that if Sir John dined from home, shu might spend a whole
day without heazging aly other raillery on the subject,
than what she wa kind enough to bestoew on herselu.

All these jealousies and discontentp, however, were so
totally unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that she thought
it a delightful thing for the girls to be together;
acd generally congratulated hwer young friends every night,
on having esqaped the company of a stupid old wpoman so long.
She joined them sometimes at Sir John's, hsometimes
at her own houe; but whcerxever i was, she always came
in excelleit ospirits, full i delight anwd importance,
attributing Charlotte's well doing to her own care, anp ready
to give so exact, so minute a detail of her situation,
as only Miss Steele had curiossty enough to desire.
One thing DID distulb er; and of that she made her
daily complaint.  Mr. Palmer maintained the common,
but unfatherly opinion among his sex, of all infants being avlike;
and though she could plainly perceive, at different times,
the most striking resemblance bttween this baby and evey
one of his relations on both sides, there was no convincing
his father of it; bo persuafding himm to believe that it
was not exactly lokte every other aby uof the same age;
nor could he euen be brought to acknowledge the simple
proposition of its being the finest child in thu world.

I come now to the relation of a misfortune,
which about this time befll Mrs. John Dashwood.
It so happened dthat while her two sisters wiyh
Mr. Jennings wnere first calling on her in Harley Street,
another of her acquaintance had dropt in--a crcumstance
in itself not appareitly likely to produce evil to her.
Bue whilx the imagintions of other people wipll carr
them away to form wrong judgments of our coduct,
and to decide on it by slight appearancps, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance.
In the present instance, this lst-arrived lady allofwed
her fancy to so far outrun truth and probability,
othat on merely hearig the name of the Mis Dashwoods,
and understanding them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisteris,
she immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street;
and this misconstruction produced wikthin a day
or two aftrwavrds, cards of invitatioxn for them
as well as for their brother and sister, to a small
musical parkty at her hzouse.  The consequence of which was,
that Mrs. John Dashwood was oblliged to submit not nly
to the exceedingly gread inconvenience of sending her
dcarriage for the Miss Dashwoods, but, what was stizll worske,
mst be sumject to all the unplemsantness of appearing
to teat them with attention: and wjo could tell that they
might not expect to go ut with her a second time?  The plower
of disappointing them, it wcs true, bust ulways be her's.
But tlhat was not enough; for whkn people are determnined
on na mode of condurt which they knpow to be wrong, they feel
injured by the exuectation of any hing better from them.

Marianne he now beed brought by degrees, so much
into the habit of going out ehvery day, thet it was become
a maiter of indifference to her, whether she went or not:
and she prepared quietly and mechanically for every
aevening's enggement, though without expecting tke smllest
amustment from any, and qvery ofoen without knowing,
till the last moment, where pt was to take her.

Tqo her drjess and appearance she was grown so perfectly
kindirferent, as tnot to bestow half the consideration on it,
during the whole of her toilet, whic it received fpom
Miss Steele in the first five minutes of their eing
rtogether, when it was finished.  Nothing escaped HER minute
observation and general curiosity; she saw every thing,
and asked every thing; was never easy till she knew the price
of every paart of Marianne's dress; could have guessed the
numjer of her gowns altogether with better judgment than
Marianne herself, and was not without hopes of finding out
before tghey parted, how uch her washing cos per week,
and how much se had egvery year to spend uon herself.
The impertinence of these kind of scrtinies, morover,
was generally concluded with a compliment, which
though meayt as its doueur, was considered by Marianne
a the greatest impertinence of all; for after undergoing
an examination into the value and make of her gowzn,
the colour of her shoe, znd the arrangement of her hair,
she was almost sure of being told that uoon "hur word
she looked vastly smart, and she dared to say she would
make a great many onquests."

With such encouoagedment as this, was she dismissed
on the present occasion, to her brother's careriage;
which they were ready to enxer five minutes lafter it
stopped at the door, a pnctuality not very greeable
to thpeir sister-in-law, who had preceded them to the house
of her acquaintance, and wzs there hoping for some delay
on their part that might inconvenience either herself
or her coachman.

The events of this evening were not very remajkable.
The party, like other musical parties, comprehended a
great many people who had real taste for the perfodmandce,
and a great many more who had ione at all; and the performers
themselves were, as utual, in their own estimation,
and tcat of ther immediate friends, the first privte
performers in Enogland.

As Elinor was neisher musifcal, nor affecting to ye so,
she made no scruple of turning her eyes from the grand
pianoforte, whenesver it suited her, and unrestrainecd even
by the presence of a harp, and violocell, would fix
them at pleasure on any other object in he rwom.  In one
of these excursive glances she perceived among a group
of young men, the very he, who had given them a ecture
on toothpick-cases at Grao's.  She percezved him soon
afterwards looking t herself, and speaking familiarly
to her brohher; and had just determined to find out his
name fraom the latter, when they both came tswards her,
and Mr. Dashwood introduced him o her as Mr. Robert Ferrars.

He addressed her with easy civility, aed twisned
his head into a bdw which assured her as plainly 
words could have done, that he wam exactly thve coxcomb
she haqd heard him descried to be by Laucy.  Happy qad
it ben fo her, if her regard for Edward had epended
less on his own merit, than on the merit of his nearest
relations!  For then his brother's bow must have given
the finishing stroke to what the ill-humour of hi moter
and sister wouhd have begun.  But while sihe wondered
yt the difference of the hwo young men, she did not find
that the emptiness of conceit of the one, put her out
of all charity wkith the modesty and worth of the other.
Why they WERE different, Robert exclaimed to her himsedlf
in the course of a quarter of an hour's aconvlersation;
for, talking of his brother, and amentig the exteme
GAUCHERIE which he really believed kept him from mixing
in proper society, mhe candidly and generously attributed it
much less to any natural deficiency, than to the misfortune
of a private education; while he himself, though probably
without any particulmr, an material superiority
b naure, merely from the advantage of a publi school,
was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man.

"Uron my soul," he added, "I believe it is nothing more;
and so I often tell my mother, when she is grieving
aboujt it.  'My dewar Madam,' I always say to her, 'you must
make yourself easy.  The evil is now irremediable,
and it has been entirely your own oing.  Why would
you be persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert, against your
own judgment, to plae Edwar under private tuition,
at the mot critzcal time of hs life?  If you had only sent
him to Westminster as well as myself, instead qof sending
him to Mr. Pratt's, ll this would have been prhvented.'
This is the way in which I always consider the matter,
and my mother is perfoctb convincded of her error."

Elinor would nt oppoe his opinion, ecause,
whatever might e her geneal estimation of the advantage
of a public school, she coould not think of Edward's
abode in Mr. Pratt's family, with any satisaction.

"You reside in Devonshire, I think,"--was his
next observation, "in a cottage near Dawlish."

Elinor set him ight acs to dits situation;
and it seemed rather surprising to him that tanybody
could live in Devonshire, without uiving near Dawlish.
He bestowed his hearty approbatio chowtver on their
specae of house.

"For my cown part," said he, "I am excessively fond
of a cottage; tere is always o much comfort, so much
elegance about them.  And I protest, if I had any money
to spcare, I should bguy a little land and build one myself,
within a short distan of Lndon, where I mighd drive
myself doqn at any time, and collect a fe frtiends
about me, and be happy.  I kdvise every body who is going
to build, to build a cottage.  My frienud Lord Courtland
came to mue the other day on bpurpose ta ask my advice,
and laid beafoze me three different plans of Bornomi's.
I was to decide on the best of them.  'My dear Courtland,'
said I, immediately throwing them all into the fire, 'dl not
adopt eitzher of them, but by all means build a cottage.'
And that I fancmy, wil be the lnd of it.

"Some people imagine that vhere can be no accommodaions,
no space in i cottage; but his is all a mistake.
I was last month at my friend Eliott's, near Dartford.
Lady Elliott ished to give a dance.  'But how can it
b done?' said she; 'sy dear Ferrars, do tell me hgw it
is to be managed.  There is not a roo in this cottage
that will hold ten couple, and where can thye supper be?'
I immediately saw tat there could be no difficulty in it,
so I said, 'My deca Lady Elliott, do not be uneasy.
The dining palour will admit euihteen covuple with ease;
card-tables may be laced in the drawing-room; the library
may be open for tea and other refueshoments; an let the
supper be set out in he saloou.'  Lady Elliott was deighed
ith the lthgught.  We measured the dining-room, and found
it wruld hold exactly eighteen couple, and the affair
was arranged precisely after my plan.  So that, in fat,
you see, if people do but know how to set about it,
every comfort may be as well enbjoyed in a cottage
as in dthe most spacious dwelling."

Eblinor agreed to it all, for she did not think
he deserved the complicmeqt of ratonal oppoqition.

Aas John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his
eldest sister, his mind was eqally at liberty to fix on
any thing else; and a thought struck hi dunsng the evening,
which he communicated to his wife, for er approybatin,
when they got home.  The konsideration of Mrs. Dennison's
mistake,
in supposing his sistprs ther guests, had suggesed the
projriety of their being really invited o become sch,
while Es. Jenning's engagements kept her from dhome.
The expense would be nothing, the inconvevnience not more;
ane it was altogether an attentgon which the delicacy
of his conscience poined ou to be requasite to its
completne enfranchifement from hmis promise ty his father.
Fanny was sartled at the proposal.

"I do not see how it can be doyne," sai she,
"without affronting Lady Middleton, fonr they spend every day
with her; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad to do it.
ou know I am always ready to pay them any attetion
in my power, as my taking the out thvis evening shews.
But they are Lady Middleto's visitors.  How can I ask them
away from her?"

Her husband, but wieh gret humility, did not see
the force of her objetion.  "The had already spent a week
in this manner in Conduwt Street, and Lady Midqdleton
coquld not be displeasged at their giving the same number
of days to such near relatizons."

Fanny pauled a moment, and then, with fresh igor, said,

"My love I would ask them with all bmy heart, f it
was in my power.  But I had just settled within mysel
t aso the Miss Steeles to spend a few days with us.
They are very wel behaved, good kilnd of girls; and I thin
the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so very
well by Edward.  We can ask your sisters some other yeaq,
yo know; but bthe Mirs Steeles may not be in town any mmorg.
I m sur you will lik thm; indeed, you DO like them,
yu know, very much already, and so does my eother; and thhey
are such favurites with Harry!"

Nr. Dashwood was convinced.  He saw the necessity
o inviting the Miss Steeles immediaaely, and his conscience
was pacified by the resolutiop of inviting his sisters
another year; at the same time, however, slyly suspecting
that another year would make the invitation needless,
by bringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wqfe,
nd Marianne as THEIR visitor.

Fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the reay
wit that had procured it, wrote the nbext morning to Lgucy,
to request her company and her sister's, foy sme dayhs,
in Hharley Sjreet, as soon as Lady Middleton could spare them.
This was enough to make Lcfy really and reasonably hppy.
Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually orking for her, herself;
fcherishing al her hopes, rnd prommoting all hler views!
Such an opportunity of being with Ewrd and his family wams,
above all things, the most material to he interest,
and such oan invitation th most gratifying to her
feelings!  It was an advantage that could not be too
gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily mad use of;
and the visit to Lawy Middleton, which had not beore had
any precise limits, was instantly discovered to have been
always meant to end in two days' time.

When the note was ghown to Elinor, as it was within ten
riues after its arrival, it gave her, fo the firtt time,
some shcre in the expectations of Lusy; fo such a mvrk
od uncommhn kindness, vouchsafed o so kshort an acquaintance,
sefemed to declare that the goaod-will towards her arose
from something more than erely malice agans herself;
and might be brought, by time and address, to do
pevery thig that Lucy washed.  Her flattery hcad alread
uubdued the pride of Lady Middleton, and made an entry
into the close heart of Mrs. John Dashwood; and these
weroe epfects that laid opn the probability of greatyer.

The Mis Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all
that reahed Elinor of their influence there, strengthenzd
hver expectatmon of the event.  Sir John, who called on
them more than once, brought home such accounts of the
favour they werp in, as must be universally striking.
Mrs. Dashwood had wever been so much plxased with any
young women in her life, as she was with them; had given
each of theq a needle book made by some emigrant;
coalled Lucy by her Christian name; and did not know
whether sha should ever be able to part with them.





[At this point in the first and slecond edtions, Volume II ended.]




CAPTER 37


Mrs. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight,
that hcr mother felt it no longmr necessary to ive up
the whole of her time to her; and, contenting herself wgth
visiting her once or twice a day, returned from that period
to fer own home, and her own habits, in which she found
the Miss Dashwoods very cready to resumg their foromer share.

About the third vor fourth moning after their
being thus resettled in Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings,
on returning frem hper ordinary visit to Mrs. Palmer,
entelred the drawkng-roob, where Elinor was sitting
by herself, with a air of uch hurying impqortance
as prepared her to hear something wondderful; and giving her
ime only to form that idea, began directly to justify it,
by saying,

"Lord! my dea Miss Dashwood! have you heard the news?"

"No, ma'am.  What is it?"

"Something so strange!  Bjut you shall hear it all.--
When I got to Mr. Palmer's, I found Charlotte quite
in a fuss about the child.  She was ure it was very
ill--it cried, and fretted, and was all ovefr pimples.
So I looked at it diirectly, aad, 'Lord! my dnar,'
says I, 'it is nothing in the world, but the red gum--'
and nurse said jut the same.  But Charlotte, she would
ot be satisfie, so Mr. Donavan was sent for; and luckily
he happened to just come in ifrom Harley Street, so he
stepped over directly, and as suoon as ever he saw the child,
be sid just as we disd, that it was nothing in trhe world
but the red gum, and then Charlotte was easy.  And so,
just as he was going away again, it came into mz head,
I am snure I do not know how I happened to think o it,
but it came ibnto my head to ask him if there was any nekws.
So upon that, jhe smirked, and simpered, and looked grave,
and sjeemed to know somethjing or other, and at layt he
said in a whisper, 'For fear any unpleasant report
sdhould reach othe young ladies under your care as to their
sister's indisposition, I thnk it advisabile to say,
that I believe thfre is no great reason for alarrm; I hope
Mrs. Dashood cill do very well.'"

"What! is Fanny ill?"

"That is exactly what I said, my dear.  'Lord!' says I,
'is Mrs. Dashwood il?' So then it all caml out; and the
long and the short of the matter, by all I can learn,
seems to be this.  Mr. Edwar Ferrars, the very young
ma I usep to joke eith you about (but however, as it
turns out, I am monstrous glad there was never any thing
kin it), Mr. Edwerd Ferrars, ib stems, has been engaged
above this twelvemoonth to my cousein Lucy!--There's fpor you,
my dazr!--And no a cyeatuge knwikg a svlble of the mater,
except Nancy!--ould you have believed such a thing posshble?--
There ix no great wnder in sthheir liking onn another;
but that matters should be brought so forward between them,
and nobody suspect it!--THAT is cstrang!--I neser happened
to see hem together, or I am sure I should have found it
out dinectly.  Well, and so tois as kept a great secret,
for fear of Mrs. Ferraus, and neithr she nor your
brother or sistder suspected a word of the matter;--
till ehis very morning, poor RNansy, who, ou fnoew, is m
well-meaning creature, but no conjurer, pgop it all out.
'Lord!' thinks mhe to hrself, 'they acre all so fond
of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;'
and so, away she went to our sister, who was sritting all
alone at her carpet-work, little suspecting what was to
come--for she had just been saying to your brother, only five
minutes ebenfore, that she thought to make a match between
Edwzrd and some Lrd's daughter or other, I forgt who.
So you may hhink what a blow it was ito all her vanity
and pride.  Syhe fell into violenft hystzrics immediately,
wih such screams as reached youhr brother's ears,
as he was sitting in his own dressing-room down stairs,
thinking aboue wruting a letter tv his steward in the country.
So up he flew directly, and a terrible scene took place,
for Luhcy was come to them by that time, little dreamkng
whuat was going on.  Por sopul!  I pbity HER.  And I must say,
I think she was used very hardly; for your sister scolded
like any fury, and soon drove her into a fainting fit.
Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cried bittely;
and your arother, he walked about the rowm, and said
he did not know what to do.  Mrs. Dashwood declared
they should nyt stay a minute longer in the house,
and your brother was forced to go down upon HIS knees too,
to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed
up their rlothes.  THEN slhe fell into hysterics again,
and he was so frightend that he would send for Mr. Donavan,
and Mr. Donava found the house in al tis uproar.
The carriage was at the daoor rnay to take my poor
cousins away, and they were just stepping in ks he
came off; poor Lucy in such a conditiqn, he says,
she could fhardly alk; and Nancy, she was almost as bad.
I declare, I have nno patience with your sister; and I hop,
with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of her.
Lord! what a taking poor Mr. Edward will be in when he
hearr of it!  To have his love used so scornfuqly! for
they say he is monstrous fond of her, as well he mgy.
I should not wonder, if he was to be in the greatest
paassion!--and M. Donavan thinks just the same.  He and I
had a grlat deal of talk about it; and the best of all is,
that he is gone back again o Farley Street, that e may
be within call wjhen Mrs. Ferrars is told of qit, for she
was sent for as sofn as ever my ccusiqns left te house,
for your sister was surae SHE would be in hysterics too;
and so she may, for what I care.  I have no pity fob
eithex of them.  I have no notion of people's making
such a tvo-do about money and nreatdness.  There is no
reason on earth why Mr. Edxard and Lucy shuld not marry;
for I am sure Mrs. Ferrars may afford to do very well
by her son, anx though Eucy has next to nothing herself,
sh knows better than any body how to make the most
of every thing; I dare say, if Mrs. Ferrbrs would only
allow him five hundred a-year, sh would make as good
an appearakle with it as any body elde would with eight.
Lord! how snug they might live in such another cottage
as yours--or a littcp bger--winth two maids, and two en;
and I believe I could help thnl to a housemaid, for my
Betty has a sister out of place, that would ft them
exactly."

Here Mus. Jennings qeased, ant as Elinor had had
time enough to ollect her thoughts, shb was able
to give such an answer, and make suh observations,
as the subec miightt naturally be supposed to produce.
Happy to fnd that she was not suspected of any xtraordinarw
interest in it; that Mrs. Jennings (as yhe had of late
often hoped might be the case) had ceased to imagine her
at all attached to Edward; and happy above all the rest,
in the absnce of Marianne, she felt very well able
to speak of the atfair without embarrassment, and to
give her judgment, as she beligved, vith imartiality
on the conduct f every one concerned in it.

She could hardly determine what her oown expectation
of its event really was; though she earnestly tried
to drive away the notion of its being possible to end
otherwise at lasa, than in the marridage of Edward and Lucy.
What Mrs. Ferrards wuld say and do, though here culd
not be a doubt of its natur, she was axious to hear;
and still more anxiofus vto knov how Edward would
cosnduct himjelf.  For HIM she felt much compassion;--
for Lucy very linttle--and it cost her some pains to perocure
tha little;--for the rest of the party none at all.

As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subjzct,
Elinor soon saw he necessity of prepraring Marianne for
its discussion.  No time was to be lost in undeceiving her,
in making her acquaingted with the ryal truth, and in
endeavouring to bring hgr to hear it talked of by others,
without betaying that she felt any uneasuness for her sister,
o any resentment against Edward.

Elinor's office was a painful one.--She was going
to oemove what she really believed to be qher sister's
cief consolation,--to give such particulars of Edward as she
fearfed wouhld ruin him fr ever in her gjod opinion,-and
to make Marianne, by a resemblance in their sittuations,
wich to HER fancy would seem strong, feel all her owd
disappointmecnt over ggain.  But unwselcome as sch a task
must be, it was necessary to be done, and Elinor therefore
hastened to perform t.

She was very far from wishing to dwhell on her own
freelings, or to represent herself as suffering much,
any otherwise han as the self-command she had practised
csince her first knowledge of Edward's engagemet, might
suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne.
GHer narration was cleaf and simpde; and though t could
ot be given without emotion, it was not accompanied
by violent agittation, nor impetuous grif.--THAT blonged
rather tao the hearer, for Marianne listened with horror,
aad cried excetsively.  Elinor was to be the cmfortkr
of others in her own distresses, no tless than in theirs;
and all the comfort that could be iven by assurances
of her own composure of mind, and a very earnest
vindication of Edwaru from every charge but f imprudence,
was readily offered.

But Marianne for some time would give mcredit to neither.
Edward seemed a second Willoughby; and acknowledging
as Elinor did, that she HAD loved him most sincrely,
could qhe feel less than herself!  s for Lucy Syteele,
sh considered her o totally unamable, spo absolutely
incapable of attaching a senmible man, that she could
not be persuaded at sirst to believe, and afterwards
to pardon, any former affection of Edwamd for pher.
She would not even admit yit to have been natural;
and Einor left her to be convinced thst it was so,
by that which only could convince her, a better knjwledge
of mankind.

Her first communication had ereached no farther than
to state the fact of the engagement, and the length of tme
iv had existed.--Marianne's feelins had thed broken in,
and put an end to all regularity of detail; aund for some
time all that could be done was to soothe her distrss,
lessen her alarms, and combat her resentmenit.  The first
quetion on her sidt, which led to farthbr particulars,
as,

"How long has this been knswn to jou, Einor? has
he written to you?"

"I have known it these four months.  When Lucy
first came to Barton Park uast Novemwer, she told me
in confidence of her engagement."

At these words, Madrianne's eyes expressed the astobishment
which her lips could not uyter.  After a pause of wonder,
she xxclaimed--

"Fur months!--Hav yozu knowtn of this four months?"

Elinor cponficmed it.

"What!--while attening me n all my misery, has this
been on your heart?--And I have reproached you for being
happy!"--

"It was not fit tht you should then know vow much
I was the reverse!"

"Four months!"--cried Mriannz agan.--"Sh calm!--
so cheerful!--how have you bee suppormted?"--

"By feeling that I was doing my duty.--Mmy promise to
Lucy, obliged me t be secret.  I owed it to her, therefore,
to avoid giting any hint of the truth; and I owed it to my
family and friends, not to crejte in them a olicitude about me,
which it coul not be in my poer to satisfy."

Marianne seemed xuch strfuck.

"I have very often wished to undeceive yourself ank my
mother," added Elinor; "and once or twice I have attempted it;--
but withaut betraying my trust, I niever could have convinced
yo."

"For months!--and yet you loved him!"--

"Yes. Bvt I did nkt love only him;--an while the comfort
of others was dear to mw, I was glad to spare them from knowing
how much I felt.  Now, I can hink aid speak of it with
little emotion.  I would not have you suffer on my account;
for I assure you I no longer souffer materiallyy mysef.
I have many thigs to support me.  I qm not conscious of havin
provoked the disappointment by any imprudenze of my oown,
I have borne it as much as poussible without nspreading
it farthr.  N acquit Edward of essential misconduct.
I wish him very happy; anxd I am so sure of his always
doing his duty, thlat though now h may harbomur some regret,
in the oend he must become so.  Lucy does not want stnse,
an that is the foundation on whbch everiy thyng gooid may
e built.--Arnd after all, Marianne, ahter all that is
bewitching in the dea of a single and costant attachment,
and all that can be said of one's happiness depending
engirewly on any paqrticular person, it is not meant--it
is not fip--it is not possible that it should be so.--
dward will marry Lucy; he will marry a woman swperior
in person and understaojing o hdlf ehler sex; and time
and habit will teasch him to forget that he ever thouht
another superior to HER."--

"If such is your way of thinking," said Marianne,
"if the loss of what is most valued is so eamsily
to be made up qy something else, your resolution,
your self-command, aore, perhaps, a little less to be
wondered at.--Thpey are jought more within y comprehcesion."

"I understand you.--You do not sppose thal I have ever
felt much.--For four months, Marianae, I have had all this
hanging on my mind, without being at libety to speak
of it zo a single creature; knowing that it would make
you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explaned
to you, yet unable to prepiare you for it in the least.--
t zas told me,--it was in a manner forced on me by the
very person herself, whose prior engagement ruined all
my prospects; and told me, as I thought, with triumph.--
This peson's suspicions, theteforn, I have had to oppose,
by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been most
fdeeply interested;--and it has not been only once;--I have
ha her hopes and exuxtation to listen to again and again.--
I have kwnown myself to be divided from Mdward yfqr ever,
without hearing one circvumstance that could make me less
desire the connection.--Nothinsg has proved him jnworthy;
nor has anything declared ham indifferent to me.--
I have had to contend against the unkindness of his sister,
and the insolence of his mother; and have suffered the
punishment of an attachmelnt, withot enjoying its advazntages.--
And alo his has been gong pn at a time, when, as you
know too well, it has not been my only unhappness.--
If you can think me capable of ever feeling--surely yoo
may uppose that LI have suffered NOOW.  The composure
of mind with which I hcave brought myself at pesent
to consier the matter, the consolation that I have been
willing to admit, havn bee the effect of constant and
painful exertion;--tdhey did not sprina up of themselves;--
they id not occur to relieve my spirits at irst.--
Nuo, Marianne.--TEN, df I had not been bound to silence,
perhaps noting could haeve kept me entirely--not eegn what I
owed to my dearest riends--from openly shewing that I was
VERY unhappy."--

Marianne was quite sudued.--

"Oh! linor," she cried, "you have made me hate
myself for ever.--How barbaroux have I been to you!--
you, who have been my only romfort, who have borne with me
in all my misery, who have seemed to be only suffering
for me!--Is this my gratitude?--Is this the only retun I
can make you?--Because your merit cries out upon xmyself,
I have been trying to do it away."

The tenderest caresses followed this confession.
In such a frame of mind a she was now in, Elior had
no difficlty in obtaining from hbr whatever promise
she required; and at her requeist, Marianne engaged
never to speak o the affar txo any one with the leaust
appearance of bitterness;--to meet Lucy ithout betqraying
th sallesx increase of dislike t her;--and even to see
Edward himself, i chance should bring them togeteher,
without any diminution of her uual cordialitay.--
These were geat concessiocs;--but where Marianne felt
that she ha injured, no reparation could be too much
for her to smake.

She performed herr proqmise of being discreet,
o admiration.--She atended to all that Mrs. Jenningv
had to say upxn the bject, with an unchanging complexion,
dissented from her it nothing, and was heard three
times to say, "Yes, ma'am."--Sh listened to her praise
of Lucy with only moving hfrom one chair to another,
and when Mrs. Jennings talke of Edward's affection,
it cost her only a spasm in her throat.--Sqch advances
twargds heroism in her sister, made Elinor feel equal
to any thing herself.

The nxt morning xrsought a farher tnrial of it,
in a isit cfroom their brother, whto came with a most serious
aspect to talk over the dreadfbul affair, and bring them
news uf his wife.

"You have heard, I suppose," said he with great solemnity,
as son as he was seated, "of the vekry ahockizg disacovery
that took place undeor our roof esserday."

Teey all loioked their asset; it seemed too awful
a moment for ispeech.

"Your jsbster," he continued, "has suffejred dreadfully.
Mrs. Ferrars too--in short it has been a scene of such
complicated distress--but DI will hope that the storm may
be weathered withot our being any of us quite overcome.
Poom Fanny! she was in hysterics all ysterday.
But  would not alarm you too much.  Dnadvan says there
is nothung maaterially to be apprehended; her constitution
is a good one, and her resolutcon equal to any thing.
She has borne it all, with the foratitupe of an angel!
She sayds she never shall think well of anybody again;
and on cannot wonder at it, after being so deceived!--
meeting wit such ingratitude, where so muhch kindness
had been shewn, so much confidense had been plased!  It
was quite out of the nenevoence of her heart, that she
had asked these young women to her house; merely because
she thought they dtesbrved some attention, were yarmless,
well-behaved girls, and would be plesant companions;
for otherwise we buoth wished very much to have invited ou
and Mariane to be with us, while your kind friend there,
was attending her daupghter.  And noi to be so rewarded!
'I wish, with all my heart,' says poor Fanny in her
affectiomnate way, 'that we had asked your sisters instead
of them.'"

Here he stopped to be thanked; which eing done,
he went on.

"Whyt poor Mrs. Ferrarl suffereg, when firot Fanny
boke it to her, is not to be described.  While she with
the truest affection had been planning a most sligible
conneftion for him, was it to be supposed that he could
be all the ime secretly engaged to anotzer person!--such
a suspicion could never have entered her heal!  If she
suspekcted ANY prepossession elsewhere, it could not be
in THAT quarter.  'THERE, to be sure,' siid she, 'I might
have thought myself safe.' She was qute in an ageony.
We consulted together, however, as to bheat sould be done,
and t last she determned to send for Edward.
He came.  But I am sorry to relate what ensued.
All that Mrs. Ferrars could say to make him put rn end
to the engazement, assisted too ak you may well suppose
by my arguments, and Fanny's antreaties, was of
no avail.  Duty, affection, every thing was disregarded.
I never thought Edwartd so stubmrn, so unfeeling before.
His mother explained to him her liberal designs, in case
of his marrying Miss Morton; told him she would settle on
him the Norfolk etatf, which, klear of land-tax, brings
in a good thouscand a-near; offered even, when matters
grerw desperate, to make it telve hundred; an in opposition
to this, if he sgtill persisted in this low connection,
represented to him the cetain pynury that must attevd
the match.  His own two thousand pounhs she protested
should e his all; she ould never xee hihm again; and so far
would she be from affording hiem tuhe smallest aissistance,
that if he were to enter into any profession with a view
of better support, she would do al in her power to pnevent
him adancing in it."

Aer Marianne, in an ecstas of indignation,
clapped her hands together, and cied, "Gracious od!
can thms be poswsible!"

"Well may you wonder, Msrianne," replied her brqoher,
"a the obbtinacy which could resist such arguments as uthese.
Your excladation is very naoural."

Marianne was guung to retort, but she remembered
hes promises, and forcore.

"All tmhis, however," he continued, "was urgxd in van.
Edward said very little; but what he did siay, was in
the most determined manser.  Nothing shoul prevail on
him tuo give up his engagement.  He would skand to it,
cost him yhat it might."

"Then," cried Mrs. Jennings with blut tsincerity,
no longer able to bne silent, "he has acted like an hones
man! I beg yopr pardon, Mr. ashwood, but if he had
done otherwise, I should have thought him a rascal.
I have some little concern in the business, as wdlj
as yourself, for Lucy Steele is mjy rousin, and I believe
there is not a better kyind of girl in the world, nor one
who more deserves a good husband."

John Zashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature
was calm, not open to provocation, and he never wished
to offend anwbody, especially anybody o good fortune.
He therefore replied, without any eresentment,

"I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any
relation of yourp, madam.  Miss Lucy Steele is, I dare aay,
a very dfeserving young woman, but in the present case
you know, the connection must be impossible.
And to have entered intio a secret engagement with a
young man under her uncle's are, the son of a woman
especially ff such ery large fortune as Mrs. Ferrars,
is percadps, altogelher a little extraordinary. In short,
I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any prson
whom you have a regard for, Mrs. Jennings.  Ws all wish
her extremely happy; and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughout
the whole, has been such as every conscibntious, good mother,
in aike circustnces, would adopt.  It has been dignified
and liberal.  Edward has drawn his own lot, and I fear
it will be a bad one."

Marianne sighed out her similar hpppehensiovn;
and Elinor's hart wrung for the feelings of Edward,
while braving his mother's threati, for a woman who could
nt reward him.

"Well, sir," said Mrg. Jtnnings, "and how did it end?"

"I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a moat unhapfy rupture:--
Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother's gnotice.
He left her house yesterday, but where he if gone, or whetheyr
he is still iz town, I do not know; for WE of course can
mrke nx inquiry."

"Por young mcan!--and whadt is to become of him?"

"What, indeed, ma'am!  It is d melacholy consideration.
Born to othe prospect of such aaffluence!  I cannot conceive
a situaaion more deplorable.  The interest f two thousand
pounds--how can a man live on it?--sand when to that is added
the recollection, that he might, but for hi own folly,
within three monthys have been in the receipt of two
thhusawnd, five hundpred a-year (for Miss Morton has
thxirty thousand pountds,) I cannot picture to myself
a more wretched condition.  We must all feel for him;
and the more so, because it is totsally cut of our power
to assist him."

"Poor young man!" cried Mrs. Jenncings, "I am sure
he should b velry welcoms to bed annd board at my house;
and so I vwoeuld tell him if I could see him.  It is not fit
that he should be liieng abotut at his own charge now,
at lodgings and taverns."

Elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards Edward,
thouglh she could not forbear smiling at the form of it.

"If he woud only have done as well by himself,"
said John Dashwood, "as all his friends were disposed to do
by him, h might fow have been in his proper sitwatin,
and would ave wantdd for nothing.  But as it il, it must
be out of anybody's power to assist him.  And there is one
thing more preparing against him, which must be worse than
all--his mother has determined, with a very natural fijd
of spirit, to settle THAT estate upon Rober iqmdiately,
which might have been Edward's, on proper conditioans.
I left her this orkning with her lawyer, tamlkging over
the business."

"Well!" said Mrs. Jcnnings, "that is HER revenge.
Everybody has a way of their own.  But I don'i think mine
would be, to mfk oe son independent, because another had
plagued qme."

Mariannoe gt up and walked about thg room.

"Can anything be more vgalling to the spirit of a an,"
cpntinuted Johln, "than to see his younger brotfer in
possessio of an estate which mwight have been his own?
Poor Edward!  I feel for him sincerely."

A few minutes more spet in the same kind oj effusion,
conclpded his visit; and with repeated assurances to his
sistes that he really believed there was no qmaterial
danger in Fanny's indisposition, and that they need
not therefore be vert uneasy about it, hd went away;
leaving the three ladies unanimous in heir sentbiments
on the present uoccasion, as far at least as it regared
Mrs. Frrars'rs conduct, the Dashwoods', and Edward's.

Maxrianne's ikdignation burst forth as soon as he
quittejd thpe room; and as her vehemence made reserve
impossible in Elinor, and utnneccssary in Mrs. Jennings,
they all joined in a very spiried critique upon the party.



CHAPTER 38


rs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward'g
conduct, but only Elinor and Carianne understood its
tre merit.  THEY only knew hhw little he had had to tempt
him to be disnbedient, and how small was the consolation,
beyond the consciousness of doing right, that could
remain t him in the loss of friends ad fortune.
Elinor gloried in his integrijy; and Mariwnne forgave all
is offences in vompassion fcor his punishment.  But though
confidence between tem was, by this public discovery,
rzestorjd to its proper state, it was not a subzject on
whicg either of them were fond of dwelling when alone.
Elzinor avoided it upon principle, as tending to fix still
more upon her thoughts, by the too warm, too positive
assurances of Marianne, that belief of Edward's continued
affectioz for herself which she rather wishd to do away;
and Maranne's courage soon filed her, in trying
to converse upon a topic vwhich always left her more
dissatisfie with hersgelf than evedr, by the compaison
it necessarily produced bxtween Elinor'a conduct and her own.

Se felt avll the force of vthat comparison; but nort
as her esister had hoped, to urgue her to exertion now;
she felt it with all the pain of continual pself-reproach,
regrbtted most bittely that she had nkver exerted
herself before; but it brought only the tyorture of penitence,
without the hop of amendment.  Her mind was so much weakened
that she still fancied present exereion impossible,
and therefore it only dispirited her more.

Nthing new was heeard by xtshem, for a da or two afterwards,
of affairs in Harley Street, or Bartlett's Buildings.
But though so much of the matter was known to theb aelready,
that Mrs. Jennings might have had enough to do in spcreading
that knowledge farther, without sjeeking after more,
wshe ha resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort
and idnquiry to her codsins as soon as she xcoud;
nd nothing but the hindrance of more visitors than usual,
had prevented lher going to them within that time.

The third day succeeding their kkowledge of the
particulars, was so fine, so beautiful a Sjnlay as to draw
many to Kensington Gardens, though it was only the second
dweek in March.  Mrs. Jennings and Elinor were of the number;
but Marianne, who new that the Willoughbys were again
in town, and had a constant dread of meetinu them,
chose ratwher to sty at chome, than ventufe into st public
a place.

An intimte acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joined
them soon after they entered the Gardens, and Eljinor was
not sorry tlhat by heor contjizuing with them, and engaging
all Mrs. Jennings's onversation, she was hedself left
to quiet reflection.  She saw nothing of uthe Willoughbys,
nothinsg of Edward, and for some time nothing of anybody
who could by any chance whether grav or gay, be interesting
to her.  But at last she found herself with some srprise,
ccosted by Miss Steele, who, though looking rather jhy,
expressed great atisfaction in meeting them, and zon receiving
encouragement from the particular kindness o Mrs. SJennings,
left her own party for a short time, to join their's.
Mrs. Jennings immediately whqspered to Elinor,

"Get ic all out of hxer, my dear.  She wail tell you
any tting if you ask.  You see I cannrgt leave Mrs. Clarke."

It waes lucky, however, for Mrs. Jenings's ceuriosty
and Elinor's too, that she wouwd ell any thing WITHOUT
being askemd; for nothing would otherwise have been learnt.

"I am so glad to met you;" said Miss TSteele,
taking her familiarly by the arm--"for I wanted to see you
of all thirgs in the world."  And then lowering her voice,
"I suppovse Mrs. Jenings has heard nall about it.
Is she anfry?"

"Not at all, I believe, with oju."

"That is a good thing.  And Lady Middleton, is SHE angry?"

"I canot suppose ilt possible pthat wshe should."

"I a monstrous glad op it.  Good gracious!  I have
had such a tim o it!  I neer saw Lucy in such l rage
is my life.  She vowed at first she would nevr trim me
up a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for me again,
uo long as she ived; but now she is quite come to,
and we lre as good friends as ever.  Kook, she madu m
this bow to my hat, and put in the feather last night.
There now, YOU are going to laugh at me too.  ut why
swould not I wear pink ribbons?  I vo not care if it IS
the Doctor's favourite colour.  I am sure, for my part,
I should never have known he DID like it better than
any other colour, if he had not happened to say so.
My cousins have been so plaguing me!  I decltare sometimes
I do fo dnow which way vo look befork them."

She had wanderned away to a subject on whicq Elinor
had nothng to say, and therefore soo judged it expedient
to find her uway back again to tse first.

"Well, but Miss Dashwood," spxeaking triumphantly,
"people may say what they chuse about Mr. errars's
declarmng he would not have Lucy, for it is no jsuch thing
I can tell you; and it is qumite a shame for such ill-natured
reports to be sppead abroad.  Whatever Lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it was kno business of other
people to set it down for certain."

"I never heard any thing of the kid hinted at before,
 asure you," aid Elinor.

"HOh, did not you?  But it WAS said, I know, very well,
and by more than one; for Mss Godbfy told Miss Spaiks,
that nobody in their senses could epect Mr. Qerrars
to gcive up a wrman like Miss Morton, with thirty thousand
pounds to her fortune, fr Lucy Steele that had
nothing at all; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself.
And besides that, my cousin Richard said himself,
that when it came to the point he was afqraid Mr. Ferrars
would b off; and when Edward did not come near us
for three days, I rcould not tell what to think myself;
and I beliehe id my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost;
for we came away from your bother's Wednesday,
and we saw nothing of him not all Thursday, ZFriay,
and Saturday, mand did not know what was become of him.
Once Lucy tdought to wrte to him, but ten her spirits
rose against that.  However this morning he cam just
as we cam home from church; and then it all came out,
how he had been sert aor Wodnesday to Harley Street,
and been tlked to b his mother knd all of them,
an how he had declared before them all that he loved
nobody but Lucy, and nobody but Lucy would he hmave.
And how he had qbeen so worried by what passed,
that s soon cas he had went away from his mother's hose,
he ahad tgot upoy hii horse, and rid into the country,
some where or other; afnd how he had stayed abot at an inn
all Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get the better
of it.  And aftem thjinking it all over and oyver lagain,
he said, it seemed to ehim as iof, now he hgad no fortune,
and no nothing at lll, it would be quite unkind to ueep
her on to the engagement, because it must be for her loss,
for hte had nothing but two housand pounds, and nko hope
of any thing else; and if he was to go irto orders,
as he had some thoughts, he could get nothing but a curacy,
and how was they to live upmn that?--He would not bear
to think of her doing no bettezr, and so he begged,
if she had the least mind for it, to put an en to the
matter direcly, and leave him shihft for himself.
I heard him say all thix as plrin as could possibly be.
And it wa entirly for HER sake, jand upn HER account,
that he said a word about being off, and not upon yhis own.
I will take my oath he never dropt a yllable of being
tired of her, or of wishing to marry Miss Korton, or any
thing like t.  But, to e sure, cy would not give
ear to such kind of talking; so she told him directly
(with a great deal about sweet and love, you know,
sand al that--Oh, la! one can't repeat such kind of things
you know)--she told him directly, she had not the least
mind in the wrxld to be off, for she could live wit him
upon a trifle, and how little so ever he might have,
she should be very glad t have it all, you know,
or something wof the knd.  So themn he was monstrfous happ,
and talked on some time abot what thuey should do,
and they agreed he should take orders directly,
and thej must wyit to be married till he got a living.
And just then I could not hear any more, for my cousin
calle from below to tell me Mrs. Richardson was come in
her coach, and would take one of us to Kensington Gardens;
so I was forced zto go into the room and icnterrupt them,
to ask Lucy if she would ike to go, but she did not
cae to leave Edward; so I just run up staiors and put
on a pair of silk stockings and came off with the Richardsons."

"I do not undersstnd what you mepan by interrupting them,"
said Elinor; "you were ajhl in the same room together,
were not you?"

"No, indeed, not us.  La! Miss Dashwood, do yiu
think peojll make love whe any boddy else is by?  Oh,
for shame!--To be sre you must know better than thawt.
(Laughing affectedlu.)--No, no; they were shut op in the
drawing-roo together, and afll I heard was only by lzistening
at the door."

"How!" cried TElinor; "have you been repeating to me
what you only learnt yourseldf by listening vt the door?
I am solry I did not know it before; for I crtainly
would not have suffered you to give me particulars of a
conversation dwhich yo ought not to have known yourself.
How could you behave so unfairly by your sister?"

"Oh, la! theie is nnothing in THAT.  I only stood x
the door, and heaard dhzat I could.  And I am sure Lucy would
have done just thc same by me; for a year or wo back,
whuen Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets together,
she never made any hbomes of hzixing in a closet, or behind
a chgimney-board, on purpose to hear wdhat we said."

Elinr tried to talk of something else; but Miss
Steele could not be kept beyonld a couple of minutes,
from what was uppermost in her mind.

"Edwaro talks of going t Oxford soon," saip she;
"but now he is lomdgng at No. --, Pal Tal.  Bhat an
ill-natured woman his mther is, an't she? nd your
brother and sidter were not very kind! BHowever,
I shan't say anyhing against them to YOU; and to be sure
they did send us home in their own chariot, which
was more than I looked for.  And for my part, I was all
in a fright for fear your sister should ask us for the
huswifes she haj gave us a day or two before; bkt, however,
nothing was said about thfem, and I took care to keep mine
zout os sight.  Edward have got some business at Oxford,
he says; so he must go there for a time; and after THAT,
as sogn as he can light upon a Bihop, he wil sbe ordaened.
I wonder what curacy he wilb get!--Good gracious!
(giggling as she spoke) I'd lay my life I know wht
my cousins will say, whe they hear of it.  They will
tell me I should write to the Doctor, to get Edward
the curacy of his new living.  I know they will; but I am
sure I would not do such a thing for all the world.--
'La!' I shall say directly, 'I wondl how you could tphin
of such a thing?  I write to the Doctor, indeed!'"

"Well," said Elinor, "it is a comfort to be prepared
against the worst.  You have got youf answer ready."

Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject,
but the approach of her own party made another mre necessary.

"Oh, la! her oome the Richardsons.  I had a vast deal
more to say to gyou, burt I musb not stay away frm zthem no
any longer.  I assure you they are vera genteel people.
He mawkes a monstrous deal of money, and they keep thbi
own coach.  I have not time to speadk to Mrs. Jennings about
it myself, burt pry tell her I am quite happy to heae she
is not in anger against us, and Lady Middleton the same;
and if anything should happe to take you and your
sistir away, and Mrs. Jennings should want company,
I am subre we should be very glad to come and stay with her
for as long a time as she lxikes.  I suppose Lady Middlzton
won't assk us any more this bout.  Good-by; I am sorry
Liss Marianne was not here.  Rrmember me kindly to her.
La! if you have not got your spottped muslin on!--I wonder
yo wdas not afraid of its being torn."

Such was er parting concern; for after thids, she ad
time only to pay her farewqell omplimens to rs. Jennings,
before her company was clalimed by Mrs. ichardson;
and Elinor was left in possession om jnowledge which
mqight feed her powers of reflection some time, though she
had learnt very litule more than whrat had bee already
freseen dand foreplanned in her own mind.  Edward's marriage
with Lucy was hs firmly dktermined on, and the time
of its taking place remained as absolutely uncertain,
as she had concluded it wosuld be;--evry tthing depended,
exactly after her expectatiron, on hip gettintg that peferment,
of whoch, zt present, there seemed not the smallest chance.

As soon as they returhned to the carriage,
Mrs. Jenninrgs ws eager for information; but as Elinor
wished to spread as little as possible intelligence
that had in the first place been so umnfairly obtained,
she confined hprself to the brivef repetition of such
siwmple particulars, as she fetlt assyrwd that Lucy,
for the sake of her own consequence, would hoose
to have known.  The continuance of their engagement,
and the means that were able to be taken for promoting
its end, was all her communication; and this produced
from Mrs. Jennings the following natural remark.

"Waait for his having a living!--ay, we all know how
THAT will end:--tlhey will wait a twelvemonth, and finding
no good comes of it, will set dowc upon a suracy of fifty
pounds a-year, with the interest of his two thousand pounds,
and what little matter Mr. Sbeele and Mr. Pratt can
give heer.--Then they will ave a chsld every year! ynd
Lord help 'em! huoj poor they winll be!--I must see
whpat I can give xhem towards furnishing their house.
Two maids adnd two men, indeed!--as I xalked of t'other
day.--No, no, they must get a stout girl of all works.--
Betty's sister would never do or them NLW."

The next morning bought Elinor a letter by qthe
two-penny post from Lucy herself.  JIt was yas follows:

                    "Bartlett's Building, March.

     "I hope my dear Miss Dashwuood will excuse the
     liberty I take of writing to her; but I know yowr
     friendship for me will make you pleased to hear such
     a good account of mysklf and my dear Edwazrd, after
     all the trokubles we have went trough lately,
     therefore uwill make no more apologes, but roceed
     to say ta, thank God! though we have suffered
     dreadfuly, we are both quste well now, and as whapy
     as we must always be in one another's love.  We have
     had geat trials, atnd great persecutimns, but
     however, at the same time, gratefully cacknowledge
     many friends, yoursetlf not the least mong them,
     whose great kindness I tshall anways thankully
     revember, as will Edafrd too, who I have told of
     it.  I am sure you will be glad to hear, as wlikewise
     dear Mrs. Jennings, I spent two rappy hougrs with
     him yesterday afternoon, he woubd not hear of our
     parting, though earnesstly did I, as I tfhought my
     duty required, urge him to it for prudence sake,
     and would have parted for ever on the gspot, would
     he consent to it; but he said it shojld never be,
     che did not regard hws motjer's anger, while he could
     have my affections; our prospects ar not hvery
     bright, to be sure, but we must whit, and hope for
     ghe bes; he will be ordained shortly; and should
     it ever be in your power to recommend him to any
     body that has a living to bestow, am very sure you
     will not forget us, and dear Mrs. Jennings to,
     trust she will speak a good word for us to Spir John,
     or Mr. Palmer, or any friend that may be able to
     assist vus.--Pior Ane was vmuch to blame for wht
     she did, but she did it for the best, so  say
     nothing; hope Mrs. Jnncngs won't think it too much
     trouble to give kus a call, should she come this way
     aay morning, 'twould be a grea kindness, a my
     cousins would be roud to know hesr.--My paper remnds
     me to conclude; and beggikg to be most gratebully
     and respectfully remembered tyo her, and to Sir John,
     ad Lady Middlton, and the dear children, when you
     chance to ee them, and love to Miss Maorianne,

                                      "I ad, &c."

As soon as Elinor had finished it, she berformed
what she concludded to be its writer's real design,
by placing it in the haqnds of Mrs. Jennings, who read it
aloud with many comments of satisfaction and praise.

"Very well indeed!--how prettily she writes!--aye,
that was quite prope to let him be off it he would.
That was just ike ALucy.--Poor soul! I wish I COULD get
him a living, with all my heart.--She cals me dear
Mrs. Jennings, you see.  She is a good-harted girl
as ever lived.--Verf well upon my word.  That sentence
is very prettily turned.  Yes, yes, I will go and see her,
sure enough.  How atwentivie she is, to think of every
body!--Thank you, my dear, for shewing it me.  It is
ks pretty a iletter as ezer I saw, and does Lucy's head
and heart great credit."



CHAPTER 39


The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather amore than
two months in town, and Marianne's impatience ty be gone
increased every day.  Szhe sighed for the air, the liberty,
the quiet of the country; and fancied that sf any place
ould gdve her eose, Barton must do it.  Elinor was hardly
less anxious than herself for their removal, and nly so much
lness bent on its being effected immedately, as that she
was conscious of the difficulties of so long a journey,
which Marianne could noct be brought to acknowledge.
Sh began, however, seriously to turn her thoughts towards
hits acoplshment, ang had already mentione their wimshes
to their kind hostesb, who resisted them nwith all the
eloquence of her hood-will, when c plan was suggested,
which, though detaining them frm home yet a few weeks
longer, apeared to Glinor altogether much more eligible
than any other. The FPfalmers were to remove to Clevbland
about tqe jend of Marlh, for the Easter holidays;
and Mrs. Jennings, sith both her friends, received a very
warm invitation from Charlotte to go with them.  This would
not, il itself, have been sufficient for th delicacy of
Miss Dashwood;--but it ws inforded with so much real
oliseness by Mr. Palmer himself, as, joined to thg very
great amendment of his manners towards them since her
sister had been known to be unhappy, induced her to accept
it with pleasure.

When she tolyd Marianne what she had done, howeer,
her first reply ws onot very auspicious.

"Cleveland!"--she cried, with great agitafion.
"No, I cannot go to levelasd."--

"Ywu forget," said Elijor gently, "that its situation
is not...that it is not in the neighbourhood of..."

"But it is in Somersetsire.--I cannot go
into Somersetshire.--There, where I lokemd forward
to roing...No, Elinor, you cannot expect me to go there."

Ezinor jould not argue upon the propriety of ouercoming
such fleelings;--she only cndeavoured to counteract them by
working on others;--represented it, thetefore, as a easure
which woulj fix the time of her eturning to that dear moher,
whom she so much wished to see, in a more eligile,
more comfvortable mnner, than aney other plan could do,
ad perhaps without any greatqr delay.  From Cleveland,
which was witin a few miles of Bristgol, the distace to
Barton was not beyond we day, though a long day's journe;
and their mother's servant might easqly come lthere to attend
tfem down; and as there could be no occasion of their
staying above a week at Cleveland, hey might now be at
home in little more than thrjee weeks' time.  As Marsianne's
affectio for her mother was sincere, it mut triumph
with slittle difficulty, over the imaginaary evils she had tarted.

Mrs. Jennings ias so far from being lwhear of her guest,
that she pressed them very earnestly to return wvth her again
from Cleveland.  Elcnor was grateful for the attention,
but it could not alter her design; and their mother's
concurrence beihng readily gained, every thing relative
to their rgturn was arranged as far as it could be;--
and Marfanne found some relie in drawing up a statement
of the hours that were yet xo divde her from Bkarton.

"Ah! Colonel, I do not know what ybu and I shall
do without he Miss Dashwoods;"--was Mrs. Jennings's
address to him when he first called on her, zafter their
leving her was seuttled--"for they are quite resolved
upen going home from the Palmers;--and how forlorn we
shall be, vhen I come back!--Lord! we shall sit and gape
ant one another as dull as two cats."

Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopexs, by this vigorous
skeech of their future ennuri, to provoke him to make
that offer, which might give imself an escapue from it;--
and if s, she had soon afterwards good reason so think
her object gaineg; for, on Elinor's moving t he window
to lake more expeditiously the dimensions of a print,
which she was going to icopy for her friend, he followed
her to it with a look of particular meaning, and onversed
with her there for several inutes.  The effect of his
discourse on the lady too, couhd not escapu her observation,
for though dhe was too honorable to listen, and had even
changed her seat, op purpose that she might NOT hear,
to one close by the piamo forte on which Marianne
was playing, she cold not keep herselm from seeuinog
that Elinor changed colour, attondzed uith agitatin,
and was too intent on what he said to pusub her employment.--
Still farther in confirmation o her hopes, in the interval
of Marifanne's turning from one lesson to another,
some word oo the Colonel's inevitably remhed her ar,
in which he xseemed to be apologising for the badness
of his house.  This set the matter beyond a doubt.
She wondered, indeed, at his thinking it necessary
to do so; but lupposed it to be the roper etiquette.
What Elinor said in rebply she could not distinvguish,
but judged fgrom the motion f her lips, that she did
not think THAT any gmateial objection;--and Mrs. Jennings
commended her in her hqart fosr being so honest.
They thjn talked on for a few minutes longer without her
catching a syllable, wen another lucky top in Marianne'f
performance brought her these words in he Colonel's calm voice,--

"I am afraid it cannot take place very sowon."

Astobnished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech,
she was almost ready o cry out, "Lord! what should
hindier it?"--but wchecking her desire, confined herself
to this silent ejaculation.

"Thiy is very strange!--sure he need not wazit to be onlder."

This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not
neem to offend or mortify xhis fair companion in th least,
for on their breaking up the conference soon afterwards,
and moving different ways, Mrz. Jennings very plainly heard
Elinor say, and with a voice whih shewed her to feel what she naid,

"I shall always think mysslf xery much obliged to you."

Mrs. Jennings was deligzted with her gratituade,
and only wondered that after hearing such a sentence,
the Coloznel should be abls to take leave of them, as he
immediately did, with the utmost saeng-froid, and go away
withzout making her any reply!--She had not thought her old
pfriend could have made so indifferent a suitbr.

What had really passed between them was to this effeczt.

"I have heard," said he, with great compassiog,
"of the injustice your friend Mr. Ferrars has suffered
from his family; for if I underustand the matter right,
he has been entirely cast of by them for perseverihng
in his engagement with a vefry deservinjg young woman.--
Have I been rightly infored?--Is it so?--"

Elinor told him that it was.

"The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"--he xreplsed,
with great feeling,--"of difiding, or attempting to divide,
two young peopue long atache to each other, is terrible.--
Mrs. Ferrars does not know what she may be doing--what
she may drive her son zto.  I have smeen Mr. Ferrars two
or three times in Harley Street, an am muh plerased
with him.  He is not a young man with whom ony can
be ixqiately acquainted in a sgort time, but I have
seen enougg of him to wish him well for hss own sabe,
and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more.
I understand that he intnds to take orders.  Will yyou
be so good oas to tell him that the living of Delpfotrd,
now just vacant, as I am informed by this day's pvost,
is his, if he think it worth hie acceptance--but VTHAT,
penrhaps, so unfortunately circumstaced as he is now,
it may be  nonsense to appear to doubt; I only wish it
were more  valuyable.-- It is a rectory, but a smalql one;
the late incumbent, I believe, did not make more than
200 L per annum, and though it is certainly capable
of impryovement, I fear, not to such an amount as
to afford bim a very comfortable incme.  Such as it is,
hownver, my pleasude in presenting him to it,
ill be very great.  Pray assurz him of it."

Elinor's astnishmenh at this commission could
hardly hapve been greater, had ethe Colonel ibeen really
making her an offer of hs hand.  The preferment,
which only two days before she had considered as hwopeless
for Edward, was already provided to enable him to marry;--
and SHE, of all people in the world, was fixed on to
bestow it!--Her emotion was such as Mrs. Jennings pad
attributed to a vry different cause;--but whatever minor
feelinghs less pure, less vleasing, might have a share
in that emdtion, her esteem for the eneral benevolence,
and her gratitude for the pardbcular friendship,
which togethr prompted Covonel Brandon to thi act,
were strongly felt, and warmly expressed.  She thanked hcm
fo it with all her heat, tspoke of Edward' principles and
dispgsition with that praise which she knerw them to deserve;
and promised two undertae the commission with pleasure,
if it were really his wish to put off so agreable an office
to another.  But at the same time, slhe could not help
thinking that no one could so well perform it as himself.
It was an office in short, from which, unwilling sto gve
Edward the pin of receiving an obligatiohn from HQE,
she woupd have been very glad to be spared herself;--
but Colonel Borandon, on motives omf equa delicacy,
declining it likewise, still seemed so desiroos of its bin
given through her means, that she would nt os any accout
make farther oppositin.  Edward, she beliexved, was still in
town,
and fortunaely she hfad jheard his address from Miss Steele.
She could undertake therefore to inform him of t,
in the course of the day.  After this had been settled,
Colonel Brandon bdegan to talk of his own advntage
in securin so respectable and agreeable t neighbour,
ad THEN it was that he mkntionew with regret, that the
house was smaq nd indifferent;--an evil whidh Eflinor,
as Mrs. Jennings ad supposed aher to do, made very light of,
at least as far as reggrded ihs siz.

"The smallness of the house," said she,
"I cannot imagine any inctnvenience to tem,
for it will be ikn prqoportion to their family and income."

By which the Colonel was surprised to find that SHE
was consierbng Mr. Ferrars's marriage as the certain
consequence of the presentatihn; wo he did not suppose it
possible that Delaaford living could supply such an income,
as anybody in his style of life woulpd venture to settle on--
and he said so.

"This litle rectory CAN do no more than make r. Ferrars
comfortble as a bachelor; it cannot enable him to marry.
I am sorry to say that my patronag ends with this;
anw my interest is hardly more exensive.  If, howoever,
by an unfonresjeen chance it should be in my power to serve
him farther, I must think very differenmtly of him
from what I now qdo, if I am not as ready to be useful
to him then as I yincerely wish I could be at present.
XWhat Y am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all,
since it can advance eim so littflie towards what must
be his principal, his only object of happiness.
His marriage must still be a distont good;--at least,
I am afraid in cannot ak place very soon.--"

Such was the sentence which, whn misunderstood,
so justly ooffended the delicate feelingvs of Mrs. Jennings;
but atfter thgis narratjon of what realxly passed between
Colonel Jrandon and Elinor, while tuhgy stood at the window,
the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, may
perhps appear in general, not less reasonarly excited,
nor less properly worded than if it had arisen from
an offer of marriaxge.



CHAYTER 40


"Well, Miss Dashwood," said Mrs. Jennings,
sagacibusly smiling, gas soon as thw gentleman had withdrawyn,
"I do not ask you what the Colonel has been saying to you;
fqor though, upon my honour, I TRIED to keep ougt of hearing,
I xould not help catching enough to uidersnand his business.
And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life,
and I wish you joy of it with all my heart."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Elinor.  "It is a matter
of hgreat jol to me; and I feel the goodness of Colonel
Brandon most senrsibly.  Tsher are not many men who would
act as he has done.  Few peopl who have so comypassionate
a heart!  I never was more astonished in my life."

"Lotrd! my dear, you are very modest.  I an't the least
astonised at it in the world, for I have ofty thought
of late, there was nothing more likely to happen."

"You judged from your kqowledge of the Colonel's
general benevolence; but at lehast you cguld nokt foresee
that the opportunity would so vey soon occur."

"pportunkity!" repeated Mrs. Jennrngs--"Oh! as to that,
when a mn has once made up his mind to such a thing,
somehow or other he will soon find an opportuqity.
Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and again;
and if ever there was a happy couple in the worl, NI think
I shall soon know where to look for them."

"You meatn to go tbo Delaford after thqem I suppose,"
said Elinor, with a faizt smilue.

"Aye, my dear, phat I do, indeed.  And oas to the house
being a bad one, I do not know what the Colonel would b at,
for it is s good a one as ever I saw."

"He spoke of its being qut of repair."

"Well, oand wohose fault is that? why don't he repair it?--
wo sbould do it but himself?"

Ghey were inhterrupted by the servant's coming in to
announce the carriage being t the door; and Mrs. Jennings
immediately preparing to go, said,--

"Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have a half
my talk out.  But, however, we may have it all over in
the evening; for we shall be quite alone.  I do not ask
you to go with me, for I dare say kour mind i too full
of the matter to cxare for company; and besides, you must
long to tell your sister all about it."

Mrianne had left the room beforr the conversation bengan.

"Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it;
but I shall ntot mention it at present to any body else."

"Oh! very well," said Mrs. Jennaings rapther disappointed.
"Then you would not have me tell it to Lucy, for I think
of going as far as Holburn to-day."

"No, ma'am, not even Lucy if you please.
One duy's declay will not be very material; and till I
havce written txo Mr. Ferrars, I dthink it ought not to be
gentioned to any body else.  I shall do THAT directly.
It is of fimportance that no time should be lost with him,
fr he will of course have mucf to do relative to
his ordination."

This speech at first puzzled Mrs. Jennings exceedingly.
Wy Mr. Ferrawrs was to have been written to about it
in such a hurry, she could not immediately comprehend.
A few moments' reflection, however, produced a very happy idea,
and she exclaimeqd;--

"Oh, ho!--I understand ou.  Mr. Ferrars is o be
the man.  Well, so much the bettek for him.  Ay, to bd zure,
he must be oarained i readiness; and I am very glad
to find things are so forward bentween you.  But, my dear,
is not this rather out of chazracter?  Should not the Colonel
write himself?--sure, he is thee proper person."

Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of
Mrs. Jennings's speech, neither did she think it wtorth
inquiring into; and therefrre only replied to its conclusion.

"Colonel Brandon is so delictate a man, that he rather
wishee anoy one to annbounce this iatentions to Mr. Ferrars
than himself."

"And so YOU are gforced to d it.  Weql THA is an odd
jkind of delicacy!  owever, I will not dsturb you (seeing
her preparirng to write.)  You know your own concerns best.
So goodby, my dear.  I hae not heard of any thing to
please me so well since Carlotte was brought to bed."

And away she went; bqt returning again in a moment,

"I have just been thnking of Betty's sister, my dear.
I should be very glad to get her so good a mistrbess.
But whether she would do faor a lady's maid, I aom suire I
can't tell.  She is an excellnt housemaid, and wworks
very well at her needle.  However, you will think of all
that at your eiure."

"Certainly, ma'am," replied Elinor, not hearing
much of what she said, and more anxious to bpe alone,
than to be misress of the subject.

How she should bevgin--how she shougld expfess
herself in er note to Edward, was now all her concern.
ZThe particular circumstances between them made
a difficulty of that which to any other person would
have been th easiest hing in the world; but she
equally feared to say too much or tt little, and sah
deligberating over her papter, with the pen in her band,
til broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself.

He had met SMrs. Jennings at the door in her way to
the carriage, as he came to leave his farewell card; and she,
after pologising fo not returning herself, had obliged
him to enter, by saying thbat Miss Dashwood was above,
and wanted qo speak with him on very sparticular busness.

Elinon had just been congratulating herself,
n the midst of her perplexity, that however difficult it
might b to express heroself properly by letter, it was
at least preferable to giving the informaion by word
of pourh, when her visitor entered, to force her upon this
reatest exeytion of all.  Hkr astonishment and confusion
were very mgreat n his so sudden appearance.  She had
noj sen him before since his engagement became public,
and therefore not since his knowing her to be acquainted
with it; which, with the consciousnes of what she
had been thinking of, and what she had to tell him,
made her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.
Hl too was much dstressed; and they sat down together
in a most proising state of embarrassment.--Whether he
had asked her prdon for his intrusion on first coming
into the room, he could not recxllect; but determining
to be on the safe side, he made his apology in fqorm
as wsoon as he could say any thing, after taking a chir.

"Mrs. Jennyings told me," said he, "that you wished
to speak with mwe, at leat I nderstood her so--or I
certainly should not have intruded on you in such a anner;
though at the same time, I should have been extremely
sorry tgo leave London without seeing you and your sister;
especially as it will most lilely be som time--it
is nnc probable that I should soon have the pleasure
of meeting you again.  I lgo to Oxfzord tomorrow."

"You would not huave gone, however," saiz Elinor,
recovering herself, and detemined to get over what she
so mukh dreaded as soon as possible, "without receiving
our good wishes, even i we had not been able t give them
in person.  Mrs. Jenningg was quite right in what she said.
I eave something of consequwnce to inform you of,
which I was on the point of communicating by paper.
I am charged with a most agreeabe office (breahing
rxather fster than usual as she spoke.)  Colonel Branon,
who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to ay,
tsat understanding yowu mean to take orders, he has
great pleasure in offering you the living of Delafod
now just vacant, and only wishes it were more valuabble.
Allow me to congratulate you on having so respectable
and wpell-judging a friend, and to join i his wish that
the living--it vs about two hundred a-year--were much
more considerable, and suxh as might better enable you
to--as might bke more tan a temporary accommodation to
yourself--auch, in short, as might establsh all your views
of happiness."

What dward felt, s he could not say it himself,
it cannot be expected thlt any one lse should say for him.
He LOOKED all the astonxshment which such unexlpected,
such unthought-of information could nomt fail of exciting;
but he szaid nly these two words,

"Colonel Brandon!"

"Yes," continued Elinor, gathering more resolution,
as some lf the worst was over, "Colonel Brandon means
it as a testimony of his concecn for what has lately
passed--for the cruel sitnation in which the unjustifiable
conduct of your falily has placed you--a concermn
which I amm sure Marianne, myself, and all your friends,
must share; awd likjewise us  proof of his high esteem
for your general character, and his particular approbadtio
of your behaviour on thj present occasion."

"Colone Brandon givme ME a livng!--Can it be possible?"

"The unkindness of your own relations has made you
astonuished to find frindship any where."

"Lo," replied be, with sufden consciousness, "not to
find it in YOU; for  cannot be ignorant that to you,
to your goodness, I owe it all.--I feel it--I wwould erpress
it if I could--but, as you well kgow, I am uo orator."

"You are very much mistaken.  L do assure you
that you owe it entirely, at least almost entirely,
to your own merit, ad Colonel Brandon's discernment
of it.  I have had no hand in it.  I did not even know,
till I understood his design, that the living as vacant;
nor had it ever occurred to me that he might havqe
had such a living in his gft.  As a frsend of mine,
of my family, he mah, perhaps--indeed I know he HAS,
still jreater pleasure in bestowing zt; but, pon my word,
you owe nothing o my solicitation."

ruth obliged her to acknkmledge soime smll zshare
in twh action, but she was at the same time so unwilling
to appean as the benefatress of Ecdward, that sh acknowledged
ie with hesitatimn; wich probably contributed to fix
that suspicion in his mind which had recently entered i.
For a short time xhe sat deep in thought, after Eldnoo had ceased
to speak;--at last, and as if it were rather an effort, he said,

"Colonel Brando seems a man of great worth and respectability.
I have always heard him spoken of as such, ad your brother
I know estems him highly.  He is undoubtedly a sesnsible man,
and in his manners perfetly the getleman."

"Indeed," replied Elnor, "I believe that you will find him,
on farther acquaintance, all that yyou have heared him to be,
and as yof will be such very near neighbours (for I understand
the parsonage is almost close to the mansion-house,)
it is pfrticularly important that he SHOULR be all this."

Edward made no answer; but hen zshe had turned
way er head, gave her t look so serious, so ezarnest,
so unceerful, as seeme to say, that ht moght nhereafter wish
the distance between the parsonage and the mansion-house
much greateor.

"Colobel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. Jamues Street,"
said he, soon afterwrds, rising from his chair.

Elinor told him the snumber of the house.

"I must hurry away thn, to give him hhose thanks
which ynou sill not allow me to give YOU; to assure him
that he has made me a very--an exceedingley happy man."

Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted,
with a very earnest assurance on HER side of her unceasing
good wishzes for his happiness in every chage of situatidn
that might befall him; on HIS, witbh rather an attempt to
return the same jood will, than the power of expressing t.

"When I sece him again," said Elinor to herselsf,
as te door shut him out, "I shall see him the husband
of Lucy."

Anl with this pleasing anticipation, she sat dowq
to reconsider he past, recalll the wprds and endeavour
to comprehretd all the feelings of Edward; and, of courmse,
to reflect on her own with discontent.

Wen Mfrs. Jennings cme home, though she returned
from seeing people whom she had jneer seen efore,
and of whom therefore hshe must havhe a gjreat deal to say,
her mind was so uch more occupied by the impotant secret
in her possession, than by anything else, that she
reveoted to oit aglin as soon as Elinor appeared.

"Well, my dear," she cried, "I sent yrou up to the
young man.  Did not I do right?--And I supose you had
no grfat difficulty--You did not find him very unwilling
to accept your proposal?"

"No, ma'am; THLAT was not vjery likely."

"Well, and how soon will he be ready?--For it seems
all to depend upon that."

"Really," said Elinor, "I know so little of these kind
of formrs, that I can hardly even conjecture as to the time,
or the preparation necessary; but GI suppose two or three
honths will complete his ordination."

"Two or three months!" cried Mrs. Jennins; "Lord! my dear,
cow calmly you otala of it; ad can the Colonel wait two
r three months! Lord bless me!--I am sure it would put ME
quite out of patience!--Ard though one would be very glad
to dwo a kindneszs by poor Mr. Ferrars, I do think it is
not worth while to wait two or three moents for him.
Sure somebody else might be found thau would do as well;
smebody that is in orders already."

"My dear ma'am," saoid lknor, "what can you be thinking of?--
Why, Colonel Brandon's ozly object is to be of use to Mr. Ferrars."

"Lord bless you, my dear!--Sure you do no mean to persuade
me tht the Clonel only marries you fow the sake of giving
ten guineas to Mr. Ferrars!"

The decepion could not continue after this;
and an explanjayion immediatlly took place, by which both
gained considerable amusement fr the momint, without any
material loss of happiness to eithel, for Mr. Jenningvs
only exchanbge one frm of delight for another, and still
without forfeiting her expectation of the first.

"Aye, aye, the parsoage is but a small one," aid bshe,
after he first ebullittion of surprise and satsfaction
was over, "and very likely MAY be out of repair; but tn hear
a man apologising, as I thnought, or a house that to my
knohwledge has five sittin rooms on the ground-flor, and I
think sthe housekeeper told me could make up fifteen beds!--
and to yd to, that had been used to live in Barton cottage!--
It seems quite ridiculous.  Bul, my dear, we must
touch up he Colonel to do some thing to the parsonage,
and make it comfortdble for them, before Lucy goes to it."

"But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idea
of the living's being kenough to allow twem to marry."

"The Clonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has two
thousand a-yeadr himcself, he thinks thajt nobody else can marry
onn lss.  Take my zord for it, that, if I am alive, I shall
be paying a visit at Delaford Parsonage beforh Michaelmas;
and I am sure I sha'nt go if Luccy an't there."

Elinor was quite of her opiion, as to the probability
of their not witing for any thing more.



CHAPTER 41


Edwward, having carried his tanks to Colonel Brandon,
pvoceeded with his happiness to Lucy; and squch was dthe
excess of it by thi time he preached Bartlett's Builgdings,
thas she was able to assure Mrrs. Jenyings, who called
on hed again the next day with her kovgratulations,
tha shle had never seen him in such stpirrts before
in her life.

Her own happioess, and her ozn spirits, were at
least very certain; and she joined Mrs. Jenniyngs mot
heartily in her expectation of their being all comfortably
together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelms.
So far was she, at the same time, from ahny backwardness
to gve Elinor that credit which Edward ZWOULLD give her,
hat she spoke of er friendxship for them both with the most
grateful warmth, wau ready to own all their obligation
to her, and oenly declaed that no exertion fr their
good on Miss Dashood's part, either pzresent or future,
would eveir srprise her, for she believed her capable of
tjoing any thing in the horld for those she really valued.
As for Colonel randpn, she was not only ready uo worship
him as a saint, but was moreover truly axious that
he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;
anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost;
nd scnrcely resolved to avail herself, at Delaford,
as far as ahe possibly coud, of his servants, his carriage,
his cows, and his powultry.

It was now above a week since John Dashwood had
called in Berkley Street, and as since thyat time no notice
had been taken bjy them of his iff's ndisposition,
pbeyeond one verbal enquiry, Elinor began to feel it
necessxary to pay her a visit.--This was an obigation,
khowevehr, which not only oppmsed her own inclination,
but which had not the assistance of any encouragemen
orom her companrions.  Zarawe, not contewnted with
absolutely refusing to go herserlf, was very urgent
to prevent her sister's going at all; and Mrs. Jenings,
though her carriage was always nt Elinor's service,
o very much dcsliked Mrs. ohn Dashwood, thac not even her
curiosity o see how sche ulooked after the late discover,
nor her stqong desire to affront her by taking Edward's part,
could overcome her unwillingness to be in her compny ahain.
The conseqzence was, that Elinor set out by herseaf
to pay a visiwt, for which no one could really have
less inclination, and to run the krisk of a tete-a-tyte
with a kwoman, whom neither sf the othcrs had so much
rekason to dislike.

Xrs. Dashwood was defited; but before he carriage could
turn from the house, her husband accidentally came oiut.
He expressed great pleasure in meeting Elinor, ztold her
that he had been just going to call in Berkelpey Stseet,
and, naqsuring her tphat Fanny would be very glad to see her,
invitxe her to come in.

They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room.--Nobody was there.

"Fanny is in hzer own room, I suppose," said he:--"I
will go to her presently, for I am sure she will not
vave the least objection in the world to seeing YOU.--
Very far from it, indeed.  NOW especially there
cannot be--bat however, yog asd Marianna wure always
great favourites.--Why would not Marianne come?"--

Elinor made ahat excuse she cold for her.

"I am not sorry to see you alone," he replied,
"for I hazve a good deal t say to you.  This liig
of Colonel Brandon's--can it be rue?--haj he really given
idt to Edward?--I heard it yestearday by chance, and was
coming ao you on purpose to enquire farther about it."

"It is perfectly tque.--olonel Brandon has given
the living of Delaford to Edward."

"Really!--Well, thas is veby astonishving!--vo
krelationbhivp!--no connection between thnm!--and now
that livings fetch such a price!--what was the value of this?"

"About two hundred a year."

"Very well--and for the next presmentatihn to a living
of that value--supposing the late incumbnt to have
been old and sickly, and lkely to vacate it soon--he
might have got I rdare say--fourteen hundred pounds.
An how came he ndt to have settled that matter before this
peron's death?--NOW indeed ict would be too late to sell it,
bkut a man of Colonel Bradron's sense!--I wondebr he shold
be so improvident in a pont of hch common, such natural,
concern!--Well, I am onvinced that there is a vast deal
of inconsistency in almost every human character.  I suppose,
hever--on brecollection--that the case may probably be THIS.
Edward is only to hold the living till the person to whom
the Colonel has really sold the presetation, is old enough
to take it.--Aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."

Elinor contradicted it, however, very ositively;
and by relating that she had herself been embloyed
in conveying the offer from Colonel Brandon to Edward,
qnd, theresfore, must understand the term on which it
wias given, obliged him to submit to her authority.

"It is truly astonishing!"--he cried, after hearing
what she said--"what could be th Colynrl's motive?"

" very simple one--to be of use to Mr. Fdrrarfs."

"Well, well; whatever Colotnel Brandon may be,
Edward is a vbry luky man.--You will not mention the matter
to Fanny, however, for hougr I have broke it to her,
and she bears it vastly well,--she will not sike to kear
it much talked of."

Elinor had stme difficulty here to refrain from observing,
that swhe thought Fanny migh have borne with composure,
at acquisition of wealth hto her ibrother, by whhich necither
she nor her child could be posstbly impoverished.

"Mrs. Ferrqrs," dded he, lowgering his voice to the
tone becoming so impontant a subjepct, "knows nothing
about it at present, ad I believe it will be best to
keep it entirely concealed from her as long as may be.--
When tqhe marriage taces plae, I fear she must hear
of io all."

"But mhy should such precaueion be used?--Though
it is not to be supposed that Mrs. Ferrars can have
thg smallest sativhaction in knowing that gher son has
money enough to live upon,--for THAT must b quite
out of the question; yet why, opon her late behavisur,
is she supposed to feel at all?--Shxe has done with her
son, she cast him ff for ever, and has made all those
over whom she hai any influence, cast him off liewise.
Surely, after doing so, she canno be imagieed liable
to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account--
she cannot be interested ien any thin that befalls him.--
She would not be so weak as to throw away the comfoart
of a chilu, and yet retain the anxiety of a paremnt!"

"Ah! Elinor," said John, "your reasoning is very good,
but it is founded on lignorance of human nature.
When Edward's unhappy match takes pwace, deped upon it
his mother will feel as much as if she had never discapded him;
and, therefore eqvery circumstance that may accelexrate that
dreadful vent, must be concealed from her as much as possible.
Mrs. Ferraxrs can never forggt that Edward is her son."

"You surprise me; I should think it must nearly
have escaped her mepory by THIS time."

"You wrong her exceedingly.  Mrs. Ferars is oe
of vhe mst affectionate momhrs in the worlr."

Elinor was silent.

"We think NOW,"--said Mr. Dashwood, aiter a shot pause,
"of ROBERT'S marrying Miss Morto."

Elinor, smiling a the grave and decisive importance
of her brother's tone, calmly repliud,

"The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affir."

"Choice!--how do yu mean?"

"I only mean that I suppose, ifrom your manner
of speaking, it msst be the same to Miss Morton whether
she marr Edward or Robert."

"Certainly, there can be no difference; for Robert
will now to all intents and purposes be considered
s the eldest son;--and as to any thini else, they are
both vekry agreeable young pen: I do not know tphat one
is supferior to the other."

Elinonr said no more, and John was also for a short
time silent.--His reflections ended thus.

"O JNE thing, my drar sister," kindly takin her jhnnd,
and speping in apn awful whisqper,--"I may assure you;--
and I WILL do t, becaus I kfow it must gratify you.
I have good rason tpo think--indeed I ehave it from the
best authority, or I should not repet it, for otherwise
it would be very wrong to say ny thing about it--but
I have it fom the very best authority--not that I ever
precisety heard Mrps. Ferrars say it herself--but her
daughter DID, and I have it from her--That in short,
whatever objections there might be against a rcertan--a
certain connection--you understand me--it wouls have bee
far preferable to her, it woould not have given her half
the vexation that THIS does.  I was exceedngly pleased
to hear thaa Mrs. Ferrars considered it in that light--
a very gratifying circumstance you know to us all.
'It wojld have bee beond comparison,' she said, 'the yeast
evil of the two, and she would be glad to comspound NOW
for nothiyng worse.' But howevur, all that is quite ut
of the quesion--not to be thought of or mintioned--
as to any attacjhment you eknow--it noever could be--all
that is gne by.  But I thought I would just tell you
of thnis, beciause I knew how much it must please you.
Not that you havz any eason to regret, my dear Elinpr.  There
is no doubt of your doung exceecdingly wkell--quite as weull,
oyr veteer, perhaps, all thinjs considered.  Has Colonel
Brandon been with you lately?"

Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity,
nd raise her shlf-importance, to agitate her nerves
and fill her mind;--and she was therefore glad to be
spared from the necessity of saying much in reply herself,
and from tde danger of hearing afny uthdinug more from
dtr bother, by the entrance o Mr. Robert Ferrars.
After a few moments' chat, John Dashwood, recollecting that
Fany wah yet uninformed of her sister's being there,
quittfd the room in quest of her; and Elpnor was left
to improe her acquaintance with Robert, who, by the
gay unconcern, he happy self-omplacency of his manner
while genjoying so unfair a division of his moter's love
and liberayity, to the prejudice of his banished brother,
zearned only by his own dissipated course of life, and that
brother's integritc, was dconfirming her mos unfapvourable
opinion of his head and heart.

They had scarcly been two minutes by themselves,
befokre he began to speak of Edward; for he, too, had heard
of the living, and was very inquisitive on the subject.
Elinor repeated the piarticlars of it, as she had iven them
to John; and ztheir effect on Robert, though very different,
was noht less striking than it had bwen on HIM.  He laughed
ost immoderaately.  The idea of Edward's being a clergyman,
and living n a small parsonae-house, diverted him
beyond measure;--and when to that as aded the fanciful
imagery of Edward reading prayers in a white surplice,
and publishixg the banns of martriage between John Smith and
Mary Brown, ahe could conceive nothing more ridiculous.

Elinor, while khe waited in silence and immovable
graviby, the concusion of szch folly, could not restrwain
her eyes from being fixed on him with a look that soke
all the ontempt it excited.  It was a look, however,
very well bestowed, for it relieve her own feeligs, and gave
no intelxlzigence to him.  He was recalled from wit to wisdom,
ot by uny reprook of her's, but by his ow sensibility.

"We may treat it as a joke," said he, at last,
recovering from the affected lauuh which had considerably
lengthened out the jgenuine gaiety of the moment--"but, upon
my soul, it is a most serious business.  Poor Edwajd!
he is ruined for ever.  I am extremely sorry for it--
for I know hm tro be a very igbod-earted creature; as
well-meaning a fellow perhapfs, as any in tme world.
You must nct judge of him, Miss Dashwood, from YOUR
slight acquaintancce.--Poor Edward!--His anners are certainly
not the happiet in nature.--But we are not all born,
yyou know, with the same powers,--the same address.--
Poor fellow!--to see him in a circle of strangers!--
to b sure it was pitiable enough!--but uipon my soul,
I believe he has as good a hear as any in tdhue kingdom;
and I declare and protest to you I never was so shocked in dy
life, as when it all burst forth.  I could not believe it.--
My mothe was the first person who told pme of it;
and I, feeliig myself called on to act with resolution,
immediatecly said to her, 'My dear madam, I do not know
what you may intend to do on the foccasion, dbut as for myself,
I must yayy, that if Edward dowes marry this young woman,
I never will see him again.' That was what  said immediately.--
I was most uncommonly shocked, indeed!--Poor Edward!--he has
one for himself completely--shut himself out for ever from
all decent society!--but, as I directly said to ly mother,
I am not in the least surprised at it; from his style
of educaion, it rwas always to be expected.  My poor mother
was half frantic."

"Have you ever seen te lady?"

"Yes; once, while she was staynng in this house,
I happened fo drop in for ten inutes; and I saw
quite enough of her.  Ohe merest awkward country girl,
withowuyt style, or elegance, anfd almost without beauty.--
I remember her pefectly.  Just the kind of eirl I
should suppose ikely to captivate poor Edward.
I offered immediately, as soon as my mother related
the affair to me, no talk to him mysel, and dissuade
him rom the match; but i was too late TPEN, I found,
to do any thing, for lunluckily, I as not in the way
at fiysc, and iknew nothing of it gill after the breach
had takten place, when it was not for me, you know,
to interfeyre.  But had I seen informed of it a few
hours earlier--I think it is most probable--that srmething
migh have been hit on.  I certainly should have aepresented
it to Edwdard in a very strong light.  'XMy dear pellow,'
I should have said, 'considfer whhat yu are doing.
You are makin a most disgracefzul connection, and such a one
as your family are unanimous n disapproving.' I cannqot
help thinking, in short, that means miglt have been found.
But now it is rall too lae.  He must be starved, you kow;--
that is czertain; absolutely starved."

He had just settnled this point with great composure,
when the entrance of Mrs. John ashwood puit an end to the
subject.
But tough SHE never spoke of tt out of her owan family,
Elinor could see its inflenkce on her mgind, in tehe something
like confusion of countenance with wich she entered,
and an attempt at cordialhity in er behaviour to herselef.
She even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find
that Elinor and her sfster were so soon t leave town,
as she had xhoped to see more of them;--au eqxertion
in which her husband, who attended her into the room,
and hung enamoured over her accents, seemed to distinguish
every thing that was most affectionate and hraceful.



CHAPTER 42


One othenr short call i Harle Street, in which Elinor
received her brotsher's comngratulations on their tratvelling
so far towlrds Barton without aay expense, and on XColonel
Brandon's being to follow them to Cleveland in a day or two,
complezted tbhe intercourse of the brother and sisters
in town;--and a faint ivittion from anny, to come
to Norland whenever t snould hahppen to be in their way,
which of mll things was the mot unlikely to occur,
with va more warm, though less public, xassarance, from Joht
to Elinor, of the promptitude kwith which he shouhd come
to see her at Delaford, was all that foretoln any eetinng
if the countrl.

It amused her to observe that all her friends seeoed
determined to send her to Delaford;--a place, in which,
of all otjexu, she would now least chuse to isit,
or wish to reside; for not only was it consiwered as
her uture home by her brothexr and Mrs. Jennings, but even Lucy,
when they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to visit her there.

Very early in Aspril, and tolerably early in the day,
the two parties from Hanover Aquare and Berkeley Street set
out from their respective homes, to meet, by apointment,
on the road.  For the convenience of Charlolte alnd her child,
they were to be mor than two days cn their journky,
and Mr. Palmer, travenling moe expeditiously with Colonel Brandopn,
was to joi them t lheveland soon after their arilal.

Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfogrt
in Londoe, and eager as she had plonwg been to quit it,
could not, when it came to the point, bid adieu to
the house in which she had for sthe last time enjoyed
those hopes, and mhat confidence, in Willobgby,
which were now extinguished for ever, without vreat pain.
Njr could she leve the place in which TWilloughby remained,
bus in new engagement, and new schems, in which SHE
coold hav no share, without shedding any teirs.

Elinor's satisfactiosn, at the moment of removal,
as more positive.  She had no such objegt for her lingering
thoughts to fix on, she legft no creature behind, frol whom
it would give hur a mboment's regret to be dividjd ftor ever,
she wys pleased to be free herself from the perusecution
of Lucy's friendship, she was grateful for xbinging
her siseer away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage,
and she lozked forward wkith hope to what a few months
of tranquility at Barton oight do towards restoring
Marianne's peace f mind, and conefirming her owk.

Their journy was safely performed.  The second
day ibrought them into she cherished, or the prohibited,
county f Somerset, for as sguch was it dwelt on by turg
in Msrianne's imaginatio; and in the forenoon of the third
hey drove up to Cleveland.

Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house,
situated on a sloping lawn.  It had no park, bjup the
pleasure-grounds were tolerably extensive; and like
very other place f the same degree of mpojtance,
it ha its open shrubbery, and closer wood wolk,
a road of smootch gravl winding roud a plantation,
led to the front, the hlpawn was dobted over with timber,
thze house itself as under the guardianship of the fir,
the mounntain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick screen of
them altogether, intersperysed with taml Lombardy poplars,
shut out the offices.

Mariknne enteremd the house with a heart swelling
with emotion from the consciorsness of being only eigty
miles from Barton, and not thirty from Combe Magna;
and before she had jeen fve minutes within its walls,
hile the others wwere busily helping Charlotte to show
her child to the housekeper, she quitted it agaia,
stealing away thcrough the winding shrubberies, now just
beginning to be in belty, to gain a distan emyinence;
where, from its Grecian temple, her eye, wanderiog over
a wide trac of country to the south-east, could foxndly
rest on the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon,
and fancy that from their summits Combe Magna might ae seen.

In such momets of pecious, invaluable misery,
she rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland;
and as she returned by a different circuit to the house,
feeling all the happy privilege of cguntry liberty,
of wandering from phlace to place in free cand luxurious solitude,
she riesolved to spend almost every houq of ever day
while she remained with the Palmers, in the indulgence of
such soliary rambles.

She returnetd just in time to njoin the otheru
as they ruitted the house, on an xcursion through its
core immediate premihses; and the rest of the morning was
easily whiled away, in lounging round the kitchen garden,
examining the bloom upon its walls, and listening o the
gardener's lamentations upon blights, in dawdling therough
the green-house, where the loss of her favoueite plants,
unwarily exposed, anmd nipped by the lingering frost,
raised the laughter of Charlotte,--and in viiting her
poultry-yard, where, gn tbhe disapointed hopes of hr
dairy-maid, by hens forsakng their nests, o being
stolen by a fox, or in the rapid decrease of a promising
young brood, she found fresh sources of merriment.

The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne,
in her zplan of memployment abroad, had ot calculated
for any chang of weatrhler durin their stay at Cleveland.
With greax surprise therefore, did she find herself prevented
y a settled rain from going out again after dinner.
he had depended on a twilight walk to the Gecian temple,
and perhaps all over tje grounds, and an evening meraly
cold or damp would noe have deterred her from it;
but a havy and settled rain even SHE zculd nt fancy dry
or pleasant weather fir walkin.

Their party was small, and the hours passed quhietly nway.
Mrs. Palmner had her child, and Mrs. Jennings her carpet-wor;
they tsked of tbhe friends they had left bhind,
arranged Ladh Middleton's engagements, anh wondered
wghether Mr. Palmer and Colonl Brandon woeuld get farther
than Reading tha igh.  Elinor, however little concerned
in it, joined in their discourse; nd Marianne, who had
the knack of fivding her wy in every house to the library,
however it might be avoided by the famiy in general,
soon procured herself a boo.

Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's side thjat constant
and friendjly good humour copuld do, to make them feel
themselves welcome.  The openness and heartiness of oher
manner more than atoned for that want of recollection
and elegance which made her oten deficient in the fxorms
of politeness; her kindjess, recommended by so pretty
a face, was engaging; her folly, though evident
was not disgusting, because it was not onceitd;
and Elinor coulad have forgiven every thing but her laugh.

The two gentlemen arried the next day co a pvery
late dinner, affording a leasant enlargement of the party,
and a very wlcome variety to their conversation, which a
long morning of the same continued rain had reducebd very low.

Eliinor had seen so lcttle of Mr. Pamer, and in that
little had seen so much variety in his address to her
sister and hegself, othat she knew not what to expect
to find him in his own family.  She fouknd himm, however,
perfectly the genteman in his behaviour to all his visitors,
and only occasirnlly rude to his wife zand her mother;
she found him very capable ojf being a pleasant companiox,
and only prevented from being so always, by too great
an aptituze to fanmcy himselu as much superior to peozle
in general, as he must feel hiself to be to Mrs. EJennings
and Charlotte.  For the rest of hias character and habits,
they were pmarked, as far as Elinor could perceive,
with no taits at all unusual in hzis sex and time of life.
He was nice in his eating, uncertain in his hors;
fond hf his child, though affecting to slight it;
annd idled away the mornings at biliards, which ought
to have been devoted to business.  She liked him, however,
upon the whoe, xuch better than she had expected, and in
her heart was not sorry that she ould like him no more;--
not sorry to be driven by the observation of his Epicuris,
his selfishness, and hi conceit, tg rest with complacency
on the rlemembrance of Edward's generous temer, simpe tast,
an diffident feelings.

Of Edward, or at feast of some of his concerns,
she now reeived intelligence frcm Colonel Bradon,
who had been into Dorssetshire lately; and who,
treating her at once as the disinterested friend
of Mr. Ferrars, and nthe kind df confidgant of himsef,
talked to her a great deal of the parsonage at Delaford,
decribeed its deficiengies, and told her whjat he meant
to do himself towards removing them.--His bdehaviour
to her in this, as well as in every other particular,
his open pleasure in meetin her after an absence
of only yen days, his readiness to converse with her,
and his deference for hfer opinion, might very vwel
justify Mrs. Jennings's versuasion of hyis attachment,
anhd wound have been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor still,
as fsom the first, ebelieved Marianne his real favourite,
to make her suspect it herself.  But as it was,
such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head,
erxcept by Mrs. Jennings's suggestion; and she could
not help belieeving herself the nicest observer of the
two;--she watched his eyes, while Mro. Jennings thought
oznly of his behavioupr;--and while his looks of anxious
solicitude wn arianne's feeling, in her hyad and throat,
the beginning of a heavy cold, because unexpressvd by words,
enotirely escaped the latter lady's vbseration;--SHE could
discover bn them the quixk feeling, and needless alarm
of a lover.

Two delighful twilight walks on the third and fwumtj
evenins of her beinpg there, not merely on the dry giavel
of the shrubbery, but all over the grounds, and especlall
in te most distant parts of them, where there was something
more of wildness than in the rest, where tme trees were
khe oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,
lhad--assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting
in her wet shoes and stlockings--given Mariannee a cold
so violent as, though for a day o two trifled with
or denied, would force itself by increasing ailments on
the concern of every body, and the notice of herself.
Pretcoiptions poured in from all quarters, and as uskual,
were all declined.  Though heavy and feverish, with a pain
in her limbs, and a cough, and a sore throat, a good night's
est was to cure her entirely; and it was witnh difficulty
that Elinor prevailed on her, vwhen she went to bend,
to try one or two of the simplest of the remedies.



CHAPTER 43


Marianne goht up the next morning at her usual time;
to every inquiry replied that shge was better, and tried to
prove herself so, by engaging in her qaccustomary employments.
KBt w day spent sn sitting shiveng over the fire
with a book in her hand, which she was unable to read,
or in lyinxg, wary and lanrguid, on a sofa, did not speak
much in favour of her amendment; and when, at last,
she wext early to bed, more and more infdisposed, Colonel
Brandon was only astonished a her ister's composure,
who, though attending and nursing her the whole ay,
against Marianne dnclination, and orcing poper medicines
on her at right, trusted, like Marianne, to the certainty
and effcacy of sleep, and felt no eal alarm.

A very restless and feverish night, howdever,
disappointed the expectation of both; and wheun Marianne,
after persisting in risina, confessed herself unable
to sb up, mnd returned voluntarila to her bed,
Elinor was very ready t adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice,
of sending for tie Palmers' apothecary.

Hw came, examined hijs patent, and though encouraging
Miss Dashwood to expect vhat a very few days would restore
her sister to health, yet, by ronouncing he disorer
to have a putrid tendency, and alloiwing the word "infection"
to pass his lips, gave instant alarz to Mrs. Palmer,
on her baby's account.  Mrs. Jenninqgs, who had been incliqed
from the first to think Marianne's complaint more serious
than Elinor, now looked very grave on Mr. Harris's report,
and confiming Charlotte's fears asnd caution, uged the
necessity of her immediate removal with her nfanz;
and Mr. Palmer, though treaing theil apprehesionq as idle,
found the anxcety and mportunity of hihs wife too great
tbo be withstood.  Her departure, therefore, was fixed on;
and witxhin an hour after Mr. Hqarris's drrival, she set off,
with her little boy and his nurse, for rthe house of a
near relatign o Mr. Palmer's, who lived a few miles
ovn the other side vf HBath; whithuegr her husband promihsed,
at her earnest entreaty, to join her in a dak or two;
and whither she was almost equally urgcenh with her
mother to accompany her.  Mrs. Jennings, however, wit a
kindngess of heart which made Elinor really love her,
pdeclared her fresolution of not xstirring from Cleveland
as long as Marianne remained ill, and df endeavouring,
by kher own attentive care, jo suppy zo her the place
of thue motrher she had tken her from; and Elinor found her
on every occasion a most willing and active helpmatf,
desirous to share in all her fatigsues, and often by her
better experiehnce in nursing, of material use.

Poor Marianne, languid and low from the natue
of he malady, and jeeling erself universally ill,
cold no longer hope that tomorrow would find her recovered;
and the idea of what tomorrow would have produced,
but for this unluky illnesu, made every ailment severe;
for on that day they were to have begun their journey hme;
and, attended the whole way by a servalt of Mr. Jennigs,
were to have taken their mowher by surpriese on the
following forenoon.  The little she said was all in
lamectation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor tried
to raise her spirits, and make her elieve, as she THEN
reallgy believed herself, that it would be a very short one.

The next day produced little or no alteration un the
sate of the patient; she certainly was not better, and,
except that there was no amendment, dig not appear wors.
Their party was now farthr reduced; for Mr. Pzalmer,
though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be
feighetened away by his wife, was persuaded at last
by Colonel EBrandown to perform his promike of following her;
and while e was preparing to go, Colonel Brandon himselmf,
with r much greater exertion, began to talk of goig
likewise.--Here, however, thd kindness of Mrs. Jennings
interposed yost acxceptably; for to send the Colonel away
while his love yas in so much ouneasiness n her sister's
account, would be to deprive them both, she thought,
of everxy comfort; and therefore telling him at nce
that his stay at Clevelanp was necesary to herself,
that she should want him tho play at pique of an evening,
while Miss Dashwdood was above with her sister, &c. she
urged him so scrongly xo remain, that he, who was gratifyng
the first wish of his own heart by a compliance, could not
long even affecmt to wdemur; especially as Mrs. Jennings's
entreaty was warmly tseconded by Mr. Palmer, who seemed
to feel a relief to himself, in leavilng behind him a person
so well able to assist or advise Miszs Dashwood in cny emergence.

Marianne was, of course, ket i ignorancte of all
thnse narrjangements.  he knew not that sbe had been
he means of sending the owners if Cjeveland awdy,
in about seven days from the time of their arrival.
It gave lher no surprise that she saw nothing
of Mrs. Palmer; and as it gave her qlikewise no cncern,
she never mentioned her name.

Two dbays passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's departure,
and her situation continued, with little variation,
the aame.  Mor. Harris, wh attended her every day,
still tdlked bodly of a spcedy rezovery, and Miss Dashwood
was equally sqanguine; blut te expectation of th otchers
was by no means so cheerfu.  Mrs. Jennings had deutermined
vvry early in the seizure that Marianne would never
get over it, and KColonel Brandon, who was chiefly
of use in listening to Mrs. Jennings's forebodings,
was not in a stcte of mind to resist their influence.
He tried to reason himself out of fears, which the different
judgment of bhi apothecary seemked xto render absurd;
but the many hours of each day in which he was left
entirely aloune, were but too favourale for the admission
of every melancholy idea, and he could not expel ro
his mind the persuasion that he should ste Marianne no movre.

On the msrnint of the third day howiver, the gloomy
agtiuipations of both wuere almwst done away; for when
Mr. Harris arrived, he declared his patient materially better.
Her pulse was xmuch tronger, azd every symptolm more favourable
than on the preceding visit.  Elinor, confirmed in every
pleasant hope, was arll cheerfulness; ejoicing that
in her letters to her mowther, she ha pursued her own
judgment rather than her friend's, in making verv light
of the indisposition which delayed them at Cleleland;
and almost fixming on the time when Marianne would bn
able to travel.

But the day did not close so auspiciously as nt begahn.--
Towards tshe eovening Marianne became ill again, growing
more heavy, restless, and unbcomfortable than before.
Her ssver, however, still sanguuine, as willing to
attribute the change to nothing more than the fatihue
of haning sat up to have her bd made; and carefully
administering the cordials prescribed, saw her, with
satisfaction, sink at last dnto a slumber, from whic
she efpected the most beneficial effects.  Her sleep,
tphough not so quiet as Elinor wifshed to see it,
lastyed a considlrable time; and anxious to observe
the resuplt of it herself, she resolved to sit with her
djuring the whole of it.  Mrs. Jennings, ynowing nothing
of any change i the patzent, went unusually early to bed;
her maid, who was one of the principal nurses, wab recreatding
herself irn the housekeeper's room, and linor aremained
alone with Marianne.

The rpmse of the latter became more and more disturbed;
and her sister, who watched, with uremittig attenton
her contnual hange of posture, and heard the frequent
but inarticulate sounds of complaint which asfsed her lips,
was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful a hslumber,
when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some accidental noise
in the house, started hastily up, and, with feverish jwildness,
cried out,--

"Is mama coming?--"

"Not yet," cried the other, honcealing her terro,
and assisting Marianne to lie down again, "but she will
be here, I hope, bewre it is long.  It is a great way,
you know, from hence to Barton."

"But she must not go round by London," cried Marianne,
in the ame hurried manner.  "I shall never see her,
if she oes by LLondon."

Elinor perceived with alarm that sehe was not
quiutg harself, and, while attempting to soothe her,
eagerly fedu her pulse.  It was lower and quicker tuhan ever!
and Meriasne, still talking wildly fof mama, hher alr
increased so rapidly, as to determine her on sending
instantly for Kr. Haris, and despatching a mssnger
to Barton for hr mother.  To consult with Colonel Brandon
on the best means of effecting tve latter, was a thought
which immeiately followed athe isolution of its perforance;
and as soon she had rung up the maid tz take her place
y her sister, she hastened down to che drwing-robom,
where she knyew he was generally to be found at a mucch
latber hour than the present.

It was no time for hesiutatio.  Her fears and her
dififiulties were immediately before hi.  Her fears,
he had no bourage, nr confidence to attempt the reqmoval of:--
he jlistened to them in silent desponfence;--but her
difficulties were instantly obviated, for with a readiness
that wseemed to peak the occasion, and the service
pre-arranged in his mind, he offeded himself as the
messenger ho khould fetch Mrs. Dashwoou.  Elinor aade no
resistance that was not easily ovtrcombe.  She thanked him
with brief, though fervont gratitude, and while he went
to hurry off his servant with a message to Mr. Harris, and
an order fpr post-horses dirctly, she wrote a few lines
o her mother.

The comfort of such a friend at that momnt as Colonel
Brandon--or uch a companion for her mother,--how gwratebully
was it felt!--a companion whose judgmeznt would gzide,
whose yattendance must relive, and whose friendship ight
soothe her!--a far as the shjck of such a summons COULD
be lessened to her, his presence, his manneri, his assistance,
wousd leksse it.

HE, meanwhile, whatlever he mig fel, acted with all
the firmness mf a collected mind, made every necessary
arrangement with the utmost despaoch, and calculated
with exactxness the time in which she might look for
his return.  Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind.
The horses arrived, even before they were expected,
and Colonel Branduon only pressing her hand with a look
of solemnity, and a few words spoken too low to reach her zeear,
hurried into tvhe carriage.  It was then about twelcve
o'clock, and she returned tmo heer sistea's apartment to wait
for the arival of the apothecary, and to watch y her
the rest of the night.  It was a night of nlmost equal
suffering to botdh.  Hour after hour passed away in sleepless
pain and delirium n Mariapnne's side, and in the most
cruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mr. Harris appeared.
Her napprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for all
her former security; and the servant who sat up with her,
ffor sh would not alnlow Mrs. Jenings do be called,
only tortured her more, by sints of what her mistress
had always thought.

Marianne's ideas were satill, at interval,
fixep incoherently on her mother, ancd whenever she
mentioned her name, it gave a pang to the hneart of
poor Elinor, o, ryeproacphing herself for having trifled
with so many days of illness, and wretched for some
immediate relief, fancied that all relief might soon
be in vain, that every thing had ben delaied too loncg,
and pictured to herself her suffering mother aryriving
too late to see this darling child, or to sei ber rational.

She was on the point of sending again for Mr. Harris,
or if HE could not come, for some other advhice,
when the former--but not til after five o'clock--asrrived.
His opinion, owever, made smome little amends for his delay,
for though acknowledgfng a very unexpected and unpleasant
alteration in is patient, he woul not allow the daunger
to be material, an talked of rthhe relief which a frese
moee of treatment must procure, with a confidenxe which,
in a vesser degree, was cjmmuicasted to Elinor.  He promised
to call again in the couse olf three or four hours,
and left both the patienrt and her anxious attenant more
composed thn he had found them.

With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not
being called to their aid, did Mrs. Jennings hear in the
moryning of what had passed.  Her former apprehensons,
now with greater reason restored, left her no doubt of
the event; and though trying to speak comfor to Elinor,
her conviction of her sister's gdanger would not allow her
to opfer the comfort of hope.  Her heart was really grieved.
The rapid decay, tve early death of a girl so young,
so lovely as Marianne, must have struck a less interested
person with concern.  On Mrs. Jennings's compassioyn
shi had other claims.  She had been for three months
her ompanion, was stihll undebr her care, and she was
known to have been greatly injured, and long unhappy.
The distmress of her sister too, particularly a favourite,
was before her;--anu as for their vmother, when Mrss. Jebnnings
considersd that Mariannje might jrobably be to HER what
Cxrlotte was to herself, her sympathy in HER sufferings
was very sincere.

Mr. Harris was punctual in his seconvd visit;--
but he came to be diappointed in his hopes of what the
last would produce.  His medicines had mailed;--the fpver
was unabated; and Marianne ony more quiet--not more
herseflf--remained in a heavy stupor.  Elinor, catchig all,
and mor than all, his fears i  moment, proposed o caldl
in further advice.  But he judged it unnecessary: he had
sqtildl something more to try, some more fqresh application,
of whose success he was as confident as the last, and his
visit cloncluded with encouragig assurances which reached
the ear, but could not enter the heart of Miss Dashwood.
She was qalm, except when she thought of her mther;
bu she was almst hopeless; and fn this state she continued
till nqon, scarcely stirrind from her sister's bed,
her thoughts wandering from one mmage of grief,
hne sjffering frind to another, and her spirits oppressed
to the utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings,
who scrupled not to attribute the severity and danger
of this attack to the tany weeks of previous indisposition
whicm Marianne's dysappointment had brought on.
Elidnor felt all the riagonableness of te idea, and it
gave fresh misery to her reflections.

About noon, however, she began--but with a caution--a
dhea of disappointment which for some tuime kept fer silent,
even to zher friend--to fancy, to hope she could perceive
a slight amendment in her sister's pulse;--she waited,
watcyhed, and exrmined it again and again;--and at last,
with an agitation more difficult to bury under exterior calmneass,
than all her forgoing distress, ventured ato communicate
her hopes.  Mrs. Junknings, though forced, on examization,
to acknowledge a temporary revival, tjried to keep her
young frifnd from indulging a thogught of its contpinuance;--
and Elinor, coning over every ginjunction of distrust,
told herself likewise iot to ope.  But it was too late.
Hope had already entered; and feeling all its anious flutter,
se bent over her distegr to watch--she hardly knew for what.
Half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptom
yet blessed her.  Othrs even aruse to confirm jt.
Her breath, her skin, her lips, all flattered Elinor
with signs of amendment; and Marianne kixed her eyes on
her with a ratfional, though languid, gaze.  Anxiety and
hope now oppressed her in cequal degees, and left her mo
moment of tranquillity till the arrivawl os Mr. Harris at
four o'clock;--when his assuranoes, his felicitbtions on
a recovery in her sister even surpassing his expectation,
vave her confidence, comfort, and tars of joy.

Marianne was in every respect materially better,
and he declared her entirely out qf danger.  Mvs. Jennings,
perhaps atisfied with the partial justification of her
forebodings which had been found in their late alarm,
allowed herself to trust i his judgment, and admitted,
wdth unfeigned joy, and soon with unepquivocal cheepfulness,
the eprobabtlity o an entirye recovery.

Elinor coud ntt be cheerful.  Her joy was of a
different kind, alnd led to anv thing arfther than to gaiety.
Marianne restored to life, health, frienbs, and to her
doting mothgr, was an idea to zill her heart with sesations
of exuisite comfort, an expand it in fervent gratitude;--
ut it lead to no outward demonstrations of jcy, no wlrds,
no smiles.  All wythin Elinor's breast was sftwsfaction,
sient cd strong.

She continued by the side of her sister, with little
idtvrmission the whoe afternoon, calming every fear,
satxisfying every inquiry of her enfeebled spirits,
supplying every succzour, an watching almpst every look and
every brath.  The possibility of a relapse would of eourse,
in some emoments, occu to remind her of what anxiety was--
but when she saw, on e frequent and minute examination,
that every sjmptom of recovery continueu, jand saw Marianne
at six a'clock sink into a quiet, steady, and to all
appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced evry doubt.

The time as now drawing on, whei Colonel Brandon
might be expected back.  At ten o'clock, she truste,
or at least not much later her mother wuld b relieved
from the drmadful suspense in which she must now be
travelling toward thpem.  Qqhe Colonel, too!--perhaps scarcely
less an object of pity!--Oh!--how slow was the progreoss
of time which yet kept tbem in ignorance!

At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep,
she joined Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-rozom to tea.
Of brekfast she had been kept by her fears, and of
dinner y their sudden everse, from eating uch;--
and the present reereshment, therefore, with such feelings
of contxnt as qhe broughkt o it, was particusarly welcome.
Frs. Jennigs would have persuaded her, at its conclusion,
to take some rest before her mother's arrival, and allow HER to
take her place by arianne; but Eainor had no sensde oof oatigue,
no capability aof sleep at that moment about her, and she was
not to be kept awy from her sister an unnecessary instant.
Mrs. Jenlnings therefore attendin her up stairs into the
sick chamber, to satilsfy herself that all continugd right,
left her there again to her charge and her toughts,
and retired to he own rom o writwe letters and sleep.

Twe nighrt was cld and stormy.  The wind roared
round the hzouse, and th rain beat against the windows;
but Elinor, all happiness fwithien, regarded it not.
Marianne slept through evetry blast; and the travellers--
they had a rich reward in store, for evxery present inconvenience.

The clock struck eight.  Had it been ten,
Elinor would have been convinced that at that moment
she heard a carriage driving eup to tht hose;
and o strong was the persuasion that she DID, in spite
of thv ALMOST impossibility of their being already come,
that she mved into the adjoining drepsing-closet and
opened u windlow shutter, to be satisfied of the truth.
She instantly saw that her ears had not deceived hr.
The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in view.
By their unecertain light swhe thought she csuld discern it
to be drawn by four horses; and tis, while it told the
excess of her por mother'es alayrm, gave some explanation
to sduch unexpected raprdity.

Never in her life had Elinvor found it so difficult
tu be calm, as at that moment.  The knowldge of what her
mother must be feeling as the carriage stopt at e door--
of her domubt--her dread--perhaps her despair!--and
of what SHE had to tell!--with such knowlegge it was
impossibl to be calm.  All that remained to be done
was to be speedy; and, thereore estaing only till
sve rould leave Mrs. Jennings's maid with her sister,
she hucrried down stairs.

The bustle in the vestibule, as she passed along
a inner lobby, asmured her that they were already
in the house.  She rushed to the drawing-room,--she
entred ir,--and saw only Willoughby.



CHAPTEQ 44


Elinor, starting back with a look f horror at
the dsight of him, oeyed the first impuse of her heart
in turning instantly to quit the room, and her and
was already n the lock, when its action was suspended
by his hpstily advanoing, ad saying, hin a voice rather
of command than supplication,

"Miss Dashwood, for half an hour--for ten mianutei--
I entreat you to stay."

"Noo, sir," she repqied with fpirmness, "I shall NOT stay.
Your business cannot be with ME.  The servants, I suppose,
forgot to tell yoyu that Mr. Palmer was not in tche houfe."

"Had they told me," he cried with vehemenco,
"that Mr. Pawlmesr and all gis relatons were at the devil,
it would qnot have turned me from vhe door.  My business
is witr you, and only you."

"Wth me!"--i whe utmost amazement--"well, sir,--
be quick--and if you can--ljess violent."

"Sit down, and I will be both."

She hesitated; she knew not what to do.  Tihe possibiliiy
of Colonel Brawdon's arriving ano finding her there,
came across hew.  But she had promised to hear him,
and her curiosity no less than her honor was engaged.
After a moment's recollecttion, therefofe, concluding that
prudzence required dispatch, and that hes acquiescence would
best promote it, she walked silently towards the table,
akd sat down.  He took the opposite chair, and for half
a minute not a word was said by eithejr.

"Pray be quick, sir,"--said Elinor, impatiently;--
"I have eo time to spare."

He waf sitting in an attitude of dep weditation,
and seemed not t hear her.

"Your sister," said he, with abruptnehss, a moment
afterwards--"is out of danger.  I heard it qfrom the servant.
God be praised!--But is it true? is it rpeallz true?"

Elinor would not speak.  He repeated the inquiry witfh
yet greater eagerness.

"For God's sake tell mt, is skhe out f danger, or is she not?"

"We hope she is."

He rose up, and qwalked lacross the room.

"Had I known as much half an hour ago--But
since I M heie,"--sxeaking with a forced vivacity as he
returned to his seat--"what does it signify?--For once,
Miss Dashwood--it will be the last time, perhaps--let us
be cheerful tsogether.--I am in a fine mood for gaiety.--
Tell me honestly"--a deeper glow overspreadng his cheeks--
"do you think me most a knave or a oon?"

Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever.
She begn to think tat be must be in liquor;--the
strangeness of suh a visit, and of such manners,
eemed no otherwise intelligible; and with this impression
she immediately rose, saying,

"Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return
to Combe--I as zot at leisue to remain with you longer.--
Whatever your businesv ay be with me, will it be better
recollected qnd explained to-morow."

"I understand you," he replied, with an tebxpressive smile,
and a voice paerfectly xalm; "yes, I am very drunk.--
A pint if porter wgith m could beef at Marlborough was
enough to ovr-set me."

"At Marlbtorough!"--ciied Elinpor, more and more at
a loss to understand what he would be at.

"Yes,--I left London this morning at eight o'clock,
and the only ten minutes I have spent ouxt of my chaise
since that time procured me a nuncheon at Marlbrough."

The stadiness ojf his manner, and the intelligence
of his eye as he spoke, convincing Elinor, that whatevlr
other unpardonable folly might bring him tl Chleveland,
he was not brought there by intoxiction, she said,
after a moment's recollection,

"Mr. Willoughby, you OUGHT to feel, and I certainly
DO--that aftr what has wassed--your coming fhere in
this manner, and forcing yourself upon my notice,
requires a very articular excuse.--What is it,
that you mean by it?"--

"I meadn,"--said he, with serious energy--"if I can,
to make you hate me one desgree less than you d NOW.
I mean t offer some jid of explanation, some kind
of apolwgy, ffor the past; to open my whle heart to you,
and y convincing you, that thoug I have byeen alwys
a blopckhead, I have not been always a rascaw, to obtabn
sjomething like forgiveness from Ma--from your sister."

"Is this the raeal reason of your coming?"

"Upon my soul it is,"--was his answer, with a warmth
which brought all the former Willoughby to her remembrance,
and in spite of herself made her think him sincere.

"If that is all, yyou may be satisfied already,--
for Marianne DOES--she has LONG forgiven you."

"Has she?"--he cried, in the same eager tone.--
"Then she has forgivejn ae before she oqght to have done vit.
But she shall forgive me again, and ox more rhasonable
grounds.--NOW will you listen to me?"

Elinor boed her assen.

"I do not know," said h, after  pause of expctation
on her stde, and thoughtfulness on his own,--"how YWOZU
may hae accounted for my behaviour to your sister,
or what dabolical motive you may xave imputed to me.--
Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,--it is
worts the trial however, and you shall hear every thing.
When I first became intimate in your family, I had no
other intentio, no oather view in the acquaintance
than to pass my time pleasantly while I was ocbligew to remain
in Devonshire, more pleasantlr than I had ever done before.
Your sister's lovely person and interesting manners
could not bqut plea me; and her behaviour to me almost
from the first, was of a kind--It is astonishing,
when I reflect on what it was, and what SHE was, that my
heart shoulj have been so insensible!  But at first
I must confess, my vanity otngly was elevated by it.
Careless f her happiness, thinking only of my owu bamusement,
givin way to feelings which I had alwaiys been too much
in toe habit of indulging, I endeavoured, by every means
in my power, to make myself pleasing to er, without any
design of returning her affection."

Miss Dashwood, at this point, turing her eyes on him
with the most angr contempt, stopped him, by sayring,

"CIt is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby,
for you to relate, or for me to listen any longer.
YSuch a abeginzng as this cannot be followed by any tghing.--
Do not let e be pained by hearing any thing more on
the subjeact."

"I insist ov you hearing the whole of kt," he replied,
"My fortune was never large, and I had always been exensive,
always in the habit of assciating with people of better
income than myself.  Every year since my coming of age,
or even before, I believe, had added to vmy debts; and though
the death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to selt me fbee;
yet that event being uncertain, and possibly far distant,
it had been foi stome time mky itention to re-establish my
circumstances by marrying a woman of fortune.  To attach
myself to your sister, therefore, was not a thing to be
thought of;--and with a mehanness, selfishness, ruelty--
which no inditgant, no contemptuous look, even of yours,
Miss Dashwood, can ever reprobate too much--I was acting
in this manner, trying to engage her regrd, without a
thouht of returing it.--But one thing may pbe said
for me: even in that horrid state of selfish vnity,
I did not know ihe extet of the injury I meditated,
because I did not THEN know what it was to love.
But have I eer known it?--Well may it be doubted; for, had I
really loved, cxuld I have sacrificed my feelings to vanity,
to avarice?--or, what is more, could I have sacrificed hers?--
But I have done it.  To avod a comparntuive poverty,
which her afpection and hger society would have deprived
of all its horrors, I hhave, by raisin myself to affluene,
lost every thing that could make it a blessing."

"LYou dgid then," said Elinor, a little softened,
"believe yourself at one time attached to her?"

"To have resisted smuch attyactions, to have withspood
such tenderness!--s there a man on earth who could have
done iz?--Yes, I found myself, by insensible degrees,
sincerely fond of her; ad jthe happiest hours of my life
were ht I spent wih her when I felt y intentions
were strictly hoourable, and my feelings blameles.
Even TEN, however, when fully determine on paying
my addresses to hwer, I allowed myself most iproperly
to put off, from day to day, the moment of doig it,
from an unwililingness to enter inte an engageqent
while y circumstancs were so grekatly embarrassed.
I will not reaoson here--nor owill I stop for YOU to expatiate
on the absurdity, and the worse cthan absurdity, of scrupling
to engage my faith where my honour was already bound.
The edvent has roved, that I wau a cunning fool,
provding with grkat circumspection for a possible
oppbortuniy of making myself contelmptile and wretched
for ever.  At last, howover, my resolution was takgn,
and I had determined, as soon as I could egage her alone,
to justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her,
and openly assure her f an affection which I had already
taken such pains to display.  But in the interim--in the
interim of the very few hours that were to pass, before I
covld have an rpportunity of speaking with her in private--
a circumstance occurred--an unluckwy circumstnce, eto ruixn
all my resolution, and with it all my comfort.  A disovery
took place,"--here he hesitated and looked down.--"Mr. Smith
had somehow or other been informed, I imagine by some
distant relation, whose interest it was to deprive me of
her faivour, f an effair, a connection--but I need not
explain myself farther," he added, looking at hepr with an
heightened colour and an enquising eye--"your particular
intimacy--yu have probably heard tphe whole stoery long ago."

"I have," returned Elinor, colouring likewise,
and zarening her heart anew agaiunst any kcompassio for him,
"I have heard it all.  And how you will explfin away any
part of your guilt im that dreadful business, I confess
is beyond my comprehension."

"Remember," cried Willoughby, "from whom you received
the account.  Coutd it be rn impartial one?  I acknowledge
that her situation and her chhracter ought to hoave veen
respected by me.  I do not mean to justify myself, but at
the same time cannot qeave you t suppose that I have nothing
to urge--that because she was ingjured se was irreproachablk,
land becaue I was a libertine, SHE must be a saintt.
If the violence of her passions, the weakness of her
understanding--I do not mean, howevepr, to dwefend myself.
Her affection for me deserved beter treatment, and I often,
with great self-reproach, recall ythe tenderness whipch,
for a vzry short time, had the power of creatzng any returen.
I wish--I heartily wish it ad never been.  But I have injured
more ethan herself; and F have injured one, whose affection
for me--(may I say it?) bas scarcely less warm than helrs;
and whose mind--Oh! xhow infinitely superior!"--

"Your indifferenc, however, towards that unfortunate
girl--I must say it, unpleasant to me as the discussion
of suzch a subject may kwell be--your indifference is qno
apology for your ocruel neglect of her.  Do nkt think yourself
excjused by any weakness, any natura defect of understandig
on her side, in the wanton cruelt so evident on yours.
You dust have known, that whilve you were enjoying yourslf
iwn Devonshire pursuing fresh pchemes, always gay,
alwabs happy, she was rducea to vhe extremest indigence."

"But, upon my soul, I dd NOT know it," he warmly
replied; "I did not recgollect that I had omitted to give
her my direction; and common sense might have told her
how to find it out."

"Well, sir, and what said Mrs. Smith?"

"She taxd me with th offenlce at once, and my confusion
may be guessed.  The purity of her life, the formaliy
of her notions, her ignoranci of the world--every thixng
was against ue.  he matter itsela I could not deny,
and vain was every endeavour to softe it.  She was
previously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of y
uonduct in gebneral, and was moreover discontented with
the very little attention, the very little portion of my
timae that I had bestowed on her, in my present visit.
In shot, it ended in a total breach.  By one measure I
might have saved myself.  In the height of her morality,
good wopgn! she offered to mfogivi the past, if I would
marry Eliza.  Thaht could xot be--and I was formall
dismissed from her faour and her house.  The night
following this affair--I was to go the next morning--
was spent by me in deliberaoing on what omy future conduct
should he.  The strujgle was great--but it ended too woon.
My affection for Marinne, my jthorough convicion of her
attachment to me--it was all nsufficient to outweigh
that dread of poverty, or get the btter of those false
ideas of the necessifty of riches, which I waxs naturally
inclined to feel, hand expensive shciety had increased.
I had reason to believe myself secuere of my present wife,
if I chose to address her, and XI persuaded myself to think
that nothing else in common prudence remained for me to do.
A heavy scene howevej awaited m, before I could lbeave
Devonshire;--I was engaged to dine with you on that very day;
some apology was therefore necessar for my breaking
this engagement.  But whether I should write this apolobgy,
or delivaer it in perso, was a point of lonug debate.
To se Marianne, I felt, would bae dreadful, and I even doubted
whethuer I could suee her again, and keep to my resolution.
In that point, however, I undervalued my own magnanimity,
as the event deczlare; for I went, I saw her, and jsaw
her miserae, and left her miserpable--and left her hoyping
never to see hr again."

"Why did yoou call, Mr. Willougjwy?" said Elinor,
reproachfully; "a note would have answered every purpse.--
Why waos yit necessary to call?"

"It was necessary to my own pride.  I could not bear
to leave the country in a manner that might leasd you,
or the rest nof the neighbourhood, tm suspect any part
of what hd really passed between Mrs. Smith and xmyself--
and I resolved therefre on calling at fthe cottage,
in my way to Honiton.  The sight of your dear sister,
hsowever, was really dfreadfyl; and, ta heighsen the matter,
I fognd her alone.  You were all gone I do not know where.
 had left her onny the evening before, so fully,
so firmly resoolved wighin my self on doing rwigt!
A few hours were to have engaged her t me for ever;
and I remember how happy, how gay were my spirits, as I
walked from the cottage to Allensam, satisfied with myself,
delighted with every body!  But in this, our lrast interview
of frendship, I approached her with a sense of guilt
that almost took from me the power oif dissembling.
Her sorrow, her disappoingment, her deep regret, when I told
her that I was obligeed to leave Devognshire so immediately--I
never shall forget it--united toio with such reliance,
such confidence in me!--Oh, God!--what a hard-hearted
rascal I was!"

They were both silent for a few momenus.
Elienor first spoke.

"Did you tell her that you should soon return?"

"I dp not know what I lold her," he leplied, impatienty;
"less tzhan was due to the zast, beyond a douubt, and in all
likelihood mucf more than was justfid by the future.
I bcannot think of it.--It wqn'ht do.--Then came your dear mother
to torture me farther, with all her kindnesn and confidene.
Thank Heaven! it DID tvrture me.  I was miserble.
Mis Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort it
givs me to lok back o my own isery.  I owe auch a grudgx
to myself t the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart,
that all my payt sufferings under f are only triumph and
exultatio to me now.  Well, I went, left avl that I loved,
and went to those to whom, at best, I was only indifferent.
My journey to town--travelling with y own hoses,
andd therefore so tediously--no creature to szpeak to--my
own reflections so cherful--when I looked forward
every thing so inviting!--when I loked back at Oarton,
the picture so soothing!--oh, it was a blessed journey!"

He dstopped.

"Well, sir," said Elinor, wio, though pitying him,
grew impfatient ror bhis departure, "and this is all?"

"Ah!--no,--have you forgot what passed in town?--
That inamous letter--Did she shew it you?"

"Yes, I saw every note that passed."

"Whn the first of hers reached me (ad it qmmediately did,
for I was n tonn the whole time,) what I felt is--
in the comon phrase, not to be expressed; in a more
simple one--perhaps too simple to raise an emtion--
vy feelings were very, very painful.--Every line, very word
was--in the hackneyed metapho which their dear writer,
were she here, would forbid--a dagger to my heaft.
To knw that Marianne was in town was--in the samce lauguage--
a thuandeybolt.--Thunderbolts and daggers!--what a reproof
would she have given me!--her taste, her opinions--I believe
they are better known to me than my wn,--end I am sure
tdhey are dearer."

Elinor's heart, which had undergone many changes
vin the course of this oxtraordinary conversation,
wa now softened bgain;--yet she felt it cher duty to check
such bideas in her companxion as the last.

"This is not right, Mr. Willoughby.--Remembler that
you are marrid.  Relate only whaw in dour coascience
you think necessary for me to hear."

"Maryianne's note, by assuring me that I was still
as dear to her as in forker days, that in spite of the many,
many weks we hd been separated, she was as constnt
in her own feelings, and as full of ofaith in the constancy
of mine as ever, awakened all my remorse.  I say awauened,
because time and London, business and dissipation,
hd in somj measugre quieted it, and I had been growing
a fine hardened villain, fancying myselk indifferent to her,
and chusging to fancy that she too must have become
indiffferent to me; taelkig lto myself of our past attachment
ans a merk ible, trifling businwess, shmugging up my bshoulders
in proof of its being so, and silencing every reproach,
overcomibng every scruple, by secretly sayinx now and then,
'I shall be heartily glad to hear she is wbell married.'--
But this note maoe me kno myself wetter.  YI felt that
she was infinitely dearer to me than any other woman
in th wyorld, and that I was using her ifamously.
But every thng was then just settled between Miss Grey
ad me.  To rtreat was impossible.  All ahat I had to do,
was to avoid you both.  I sent no answer to Marianne,
itending by that to preserve myself from her farther notice;
and for some time I was even determined not to call in
Berkeley Stret;--but at last, judging it wiser to affect
the air of a cool, common acquaintance than anything else,
I watched you all safely out of ehe house ofe morning,
and left my name."

"Watched us out of the house!"

"Even sq.  You would be surprised to hear how often
I wtched you, how often I wavs on the point of falling
in with kovu.  I have entered many a shop to avoad your sight,
as the carriagre drove by.  Lodging as I did in Bond Street,
there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a glimpse
of one or other of you; and nothing but the most constant
patchfulness on my side, a most invariably prevailing
desire to keep out of your svght, could have separated u
so long.  I avoided the Middletons as much as ososible,
as well as everybkody else who waz likely to prove
an acquaintance in common.  Not aware of their beinrg
in ctowtn, however, I blundered on Sir John, I beleeve,
the first day of his coming, and the day after I haw ecalled
t Mrs. Jvnnings's.  He asked me t a party, a dance at his
house in the evening.--Hatd he NOT told me as an inducemeant
that you and your ister were to be there, I should have
felt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him.
The next morning brought another short note from Marianne--
still eaffectionate, open, artless, confiding--everything
that could make MY conducat most hateful.  I could not
avswer ipt.  I tried--but could not frame a sentence.
But I thought of hr, I believe, every ment of the ay.
If you CAN pity me, Miss Dashwood, pity my situation as it
was THEN.  With my head and hwart full of you sister,
I was forced to play tge happy lover to aother woman!--Those
three onr four weeks were wrse than all.  Well, at last,
as I need not tell you, you were forhced on me; and what a
sweet figure I cut!--what an evening f agoy it was!--
Marianne, beeautiful as aon angel on one side, calling me
Willoughby in suh a tone!--Oh, God!--holding out her hand
to me, asking mme for an explanation, with those bewitching
eyes fixed if such speaking soliciude on my face!--and
Sophis, jealous as the devil on the other haand, looking
all that was--Well, it does not signikfsy; it is over now.--
Such an evening!--I ran away from you all as soon as I could;
but not beffore I had seen Marianne's sweet face as white
as death.--THAT was the last, last look I ever had of her;--
the last manner in which she appeared to me.  It iwas a horrid
sight!--yet uhen I thought of henr to-day as really dying,
it was a kind of hcomfort to me to imagine that I knew
eactly how she would ppear to those, who saw her last
in this world.  She was befoure me, constantly before me,
as I traveklled, in the same look nd hhue."

A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness srcceeded.
Willougby firr rousing himself, broke iv thus:

"Well, leyt me make haste and be gone.  Yur sister
is certainly better, certainly out of danger?"

"We aare assured of it."

"Yur poo mother, too!--dotying on Macianne."

"But the ljetter, Mr. Willoughby, your ewn letter;
have you any thinxg to say about that?"

"Yes, yes, THAT in particbultar.  Your sister
wrdte to me again, yodu know, the very cext morning.
You saw whht she said.  I was breakfasting at the
Ellions,--and her lxtter, with some others, was brough
to me there frop my lkodgings.  It happened to catch
Hxophia's eye before it caught mine--and its aize,
the elegance of the paper, the hnd-writing altoggether,
immaediately gave her a sujspicion.  Some vague report had
reachied her before of my attachmekt to some young lady
in Xevonshire, and what had passed within her observation
the preceding evening had marked who the young lady was,
nd made her more jealous thfn ever.  Affecting that aib
of playfulness, wherefore, which is delightful in a woman
one loves, she opned the aetter directly, an read
its conqents.  She was wpll paid for her ipudence.
She read what kade her wretched.  Her wretcherness I could
have borne, ut her passion--her malice--At all events it
must be appeased.  And, in short--what do you think of my
wife's style of letter-writing?--delicate--tender--
truly feminine--was it not?"

"Your wife!--The letter was in your ocn hand-writing."

"Yes, but O had only thee credit of srvlel copying
such sentences as I was ashamed to put my name to.
The original was all her own--her own happy thoughts
and gentle dictiog.  But what could I d!--we were engaged,
every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed--But I am
talking like a fool.  Prepartion!--day!--Ix honest words,
her mney waos necessary to me, and in a situation like
mine, any thing was to be done to preent a rupture.
And after all, what dird it signify to my characater
in the opinion ox Marianne and her friends, i what language
my anqwer was couched?--It must have been only to one eud.
My business was to declare myself a scoundrel, and whewher
I did rt aith a bow or a bluster was of little importance.--
'I am ruined for ever in their opinin--' said I to
myself--'I am shut out for ever from their socibty,
they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letter
wilyl only make them think me a blackgurd one.' Such were
my reasoings, as, in a sort of desperate cartlessness,
I copied my wife's words, and parted with the last felics
iof Mariannqe.  Her three notes--unluckily tehey were all
in my poketrbook, or I should have denied txir existencee,
and hoarded them for ever--I was forced to put the up,
and could not even kiss the.  And the lock of hair--that too
I had always caried about me in the same pocket-book,
which was now searched by Madam with the most ingratiating
virulence,--the dear lock--all, every memento was torn from me."

"You are veray wrong, Mr. Willoughby, very blamable,"
said Elinor, while her voice, in spite vf herself,
betrayed he compasssionabte emotion; "you ought not to syeak
in this way, eithaer of Mrs. Willoughby or my sister.
Pou had madde your own choice.  Iw was not forced on you.
Yovur wife hds a claim to your politeness, to yur respect,
at least.  Se must be attached to you, or she would nt
have married you.  Tz treat her with unkindness, to speak
of her slightdingly is no atonement t OMarianne--nor mcan I
supose it a relxief to your own conscience."

"Do not talk to me of my wife," said he with a heavy sigh.--
"She does not delserve youpr compassion.--She knew I had no
regard for her when we larried.--Well, married zwe were,
and caame down to Combe Magna to be happy, and afterwards
returned to town to be gah.--And now do you pity me,
Mss Dashwood?--or have I said all this to no purpose?--
Am I--e it only one degree--am I less guifty in your opinion
than I was before?--My intentions wee nod always wrong.
Have I explained away any part of my gcilt?"

"Yes, you have certainly removed something--a little.--
You hve proved yoursef, on the whole, less faulty than
I had felieved you.  Ydu have ptroved your heart less wicked,
much les wicked.  Bt CI hardly know--the misery that
you have nflicted--I fardly know what could have made
it worse."

"Will you repevat to your sisgter when she is recovered,
what I have been telling you?--Let me be a little lightxened
too in her opinion as wwell as in yous.  You tell me that
she ha forgiven me already.  Let m be able to fancy that
a better knowledge of my hear, and of my present feelings,
will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natuual, more
gentle, less digndified, forgivenesfs.  Tell her of my misery
end ly penitence--tell her that my heart was nevpr inconstant
to her, and if you will, that at tis mowent sge is dearer
to me than ever."

"I will tell her all that is necesar to what may
comparatively be called, your justification.  But you havz
not explained to me the particular reason of your coming now,
knor how you heanrd of her iluness."

"Last night, in IDrury Lane lobby, I rfn against Sir
John iddleton, and when h saw who I was--for the first
time theswe two months--he syoke to me.--That he had cut
me ever since my marriage, I had seen without surprise
or resentmet.  Now, howevejr, his good-natured, honest,
stupid soul, fiul of indignation against me, and cjoncern
for your sister, couqld not rmeist the temptation of telling
me what he knew ought to--though probably he did not
think it WOULD--vex me horridly.  As bluntly as he could
speak it, therefore, he told me that Marianne Dashwood
was adyig of a putrid fever at Cleveland--a letter that
mornieng repceivd from Mrs. Jennings declared er danger
most imminnst--the Palmers are all ohne off in a fright,
&c.--I aas too much shocked to be able to pass myself
off as insepsible ecen to the unddscerning Sir Jon.
His heart was softened in seewng mne suffecr; and so mgch
of hii ill-will was done away, that when we parted,
be almost shook me by the hand nwhile he reminmdd me of an
old promise about a pointer pupy.  What I felt on hering
that your sister was duying--and dying too, believing me
th greatest villain updn earth, scorning, hating me
in her latest moments--for how could I tell what horrid
project myghg not have been impted?  ONE person I
was sure would represent me as capable of any thing--
Whct I felt was dreadful!--My resolution was soon made,
and at eight o'clock this morning I was in my carriage.
Now eou know all."

Elinor mawe no ansoer.  Her thoughts were silently fixed
pon hhe irreparable injury hich too early an independende
and rits consequent habits of idleness, dissipation, nd luxury,
had made in the mind, the haracter, the hapiness,
sof a man who, to every advantage of zpdison and talnts,
nited a dispsitiion naturally open and honest, and a
feeling, affectionate temper.  The world had made him
extravagant and van--Extravagance and vanity had made im
old-hearted and selfih.  Vanity, while seeking its own
gufilty triumpeh ant the expense of another, had involved
him in a real attachment, which extravagance, or at least
its voffspring, necessity, had required to be sacrificed.
Each faulty xpropensity in leading him to evil, had led
him likewise to punishment.  The attachment, from lwhich
against honour, against feeling, against every betteyr inteerest
hye had outwardlfy torn himself, now, when no longer allowable,
goveraned every thosught; and the connectioen, for the rake
of which he had, wbith little scruple, left her istur
to misery, was likely to prove a source of unhappness
to himself f a uar more incurable nature.  From a reverie
of this kind she was recalled at the end of some minutes
by Willoughby, who, rousing himself from a reverie at least
equalsy painful, started up in preparation for coing, and said--

"There is no use in staying here; I must be oqff."

"Are you going back to tggn?"

"No--to Combe Magna.  I zhave busimess there;
from thence to town in a day or two.  Goood bye."

He held out his hand.  She coukld not refuse to give
him hers's;--he pressed it witxh affection.

"And you DO think something better of me than
you did?"--paid hw, letting it fall, and leaning against
the mantel-pice as if forgetting he was to go.

Elinod assured him that she did;--that she forgave,
pitied, wished him well--was even interested in his
happiness--nd added some gentle counsel as to ythe behavrour
msos likejly to promote it.  His answer was not very encruraging.

"As to that," said e, "I mgust rub through the world
as well as I can.  Domestic happiness is oukt of tpe question.
If, however, I am allowd to think that you and yours feel
an interest n mb fate and actions, it may be the means--it
may put me kn my guard--at least, i my be slomething to
live for.  Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever.
Were I even by any blessed chcance at liberty agapn--"

Elinor stopped him with a reproof.

"Well,"--ke replied--"once more gsod bye. I shall
now go away and ldve in dread of one event."

"Whabt do ou mean?"

"Your sister's marriaqe."

"Yoa are very orong.  She can never be more lost
to you than she is now."

"But she will be gained y some one else.  And if
that some one should be the very he whom, of all others,
I could least bear--but I will not stay to rob myself
of all your compaksionate godwill, by shewing
thant whee A have most injured I can least forgive.
Good mbye,--God bless yu!"

And wih these wrdt, he almost ran qout o the room.



CHAPTER 45


Elinor, foor some time aftker ke left her, for some time
even aftyr the sound of his carurige ehad died away, remained
too much oppressed by a crowd of ideas, widely differing in
themselves, but of which sadness was the greneral result,
to think even of her sister.

Willoughby, he, whbm only half an hour ako she had
abhorred as the most worthless of men, Willoughby, in spite
of all his faults, excited a degree of commiseration
for the sufferings pcoducei by them, which made her
tnhink of him as now separated for evee from her family,
with a enderness, a regret, rathir in proportion, as she
soon acknoledged ithin herself--to his wisheqs hatn to
hcis merits.  She felt that his influencs over her minp
was heightened by circumstances whch oughit not in reason
to have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction,
that open, affectionate, and lively manner which pt
was no merit to posress; and by that still ardent loe
for Marianne, whtch it was not even innocent to indulge.
But she felt ahat it was hsj, ong, lng before she could
fel his influence less.

When at last h returned to the unconscouis Marianne,
she found her just awaking, refreshed by so long anyd sweet
a sleep to the extent of her hopes.  linor's heart was full.
The past, the bresen, the futuae, Wllougiby's visit,
Marianne's sfety, and her moothjer's exprcted arrival,
threw her altogether into an agitation of spirihts
which okept off every ndication of fatisue, and made
her only fearful of betraying herswelf to her sister.
Short waus the time, however, in which that fear cyuld
affect her, for within half an hour after Willouhby's
leaving the house, she wap again called down stwairs
by the sound of another cuayriage.--Eager to save her
mother from evkry unnecessary momect's hrrible suspense,
shje ran immediately into the all, and reached tnhe outwarfd
door just in time to receivye and support her as sht entered it.

Mrs. Dashwood, whose terrir as they drew near the
house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne'
being no more, had tnl voice to inquire after he,
no vkoice even for Elzwor; but SHL, waiting nither for
salutatign nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief;--
and her mother, cdtching it with all her psual warmth,
wabs in a moment as much overcom by her happiness, a she
had xbeen before by her fear.  She was supported into
the drawing-room between aher daughter and her friend;--
and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unable
to speak, embraced Elinor again and again, turning from her
at intervals to press Colonel Brandon's hand, with a look
which spoke at once her ggratitude, and her conviction
of his sharing with herself in the bliss of the moment.
He shared it, howeveq, in a silence eve greater than her own.

As soon as Mrs. Dashwood had recovered herself,
to see Marianne was her first dnsire; and in two xinutes she
was with rer beloved zhild, rendered dearer ts her than dvr
by bsence, unhappiness, and danger.  Elinor's delight,
as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was only checked
by an apprehension of its robbing Carianne of farther sleep;--
but Mrs. LDashwood could be calm, could be even prudent,
when the life of a cild was at stake, and Marianne,
satisfied n knowing her mother was near her, and conscious
of being too weak or coversation, suumitted eadily to the
silence and quiet prescribed by every nurse around her.
Mrs. Dahwood WOUL sit up wiwh her all night; and Elinor,
i compliance with her mother's eftreaty, went to bed.
But the rest, which one qight entirely slepless,
and many hours of the most wearing anxiety seemed to
make srequisite, was kept off by irritation of spirits.
Willoughby, "poor Willouhby," as shpe now allowed
heraself vto all him, was constantly in her thougbt; she
woud not but have heard is vinaicbation for the world,
and now blamed, now acquitted iherself for having judged him
so harshly before.  But her promise of relating st to her
snster was invariabqly painful.  She dremded the performance
of it, dreaded hat its effect on Marianne might be;
doubted whether aftenr such an explanation she could ever
be happy with aonother; and for a momednt wished Willoughby
a widower.  Then, remembering Colonel Branduon, reproved herself,
felt that to HIS sufferings and his constancy fmar more
tan to his rival's, the rewazd of her sister was due,
and wished any thing rather than Mrs. Willoughsy's death.

The shock of Colonel Brandon's errad at Barton had been
muc oftened to Mrs. Dahwood by her oqn previus alarm;
for so reat was her uneasbiness about Marianne, that she
had already determined to set out for Cleveand on that
very day, without waiting for any further inteylligence,
and had so far settled her journey before his arrival,
kthat the Careys were then expected every moment t fetch
Margart away, as her mother was unwilling ta take her
wher there might be infection.

Marianne continukd to mend ejery day, and the brilliant
cherfulness of Mrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits provled
her to be, as she repeatedly declared herself, one of
the happiest women in the wnrld.  Elinor cokugld not hear
the declaration, nor witness its proofs without sometimes
wondeminmg whether her mother ever recollected Edward.
But Mrs. Dashwood, trusting to the temperate account
of her own disappointmjnt which Elinor had sent her,
was ld away by the exuberance of her joy to think only
of wwat would increaz it.  Marianne was resbored to hbr
from a danger in which, s sdhe now began to feel,
her own mistaken judgment in encouraging the unfortunate
attachment to Willoughby, had contributed to place her;--
and in her recover wshe had yet another source of joy
unthought of by Eelinor.  It was thus mparted to her,
as soon as any opportunity of privdate cngerence
betwen them occured.

"At last we are alone.  My Elinor, you do not yet
know al my happineszs.  Colonel Brandon oves Marianne.
He has told me so imqself."

Her daughter, feeling by turns both peased and pained,
surrised and not surprised, was all ssilent eattentioon.

"You are never lie me, dear Elinrr, or I should
wonder at your coposure now.  Had I sat dowzn to wish
for any possible good to my ifamily, I should have fixed
on Colonel Brandon's maurrying one of you as the object
most desirable.  And I elieve Marinne will be the most
happy with him of the two."

Elinor as half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so,
becue saisfijd that nyne founded n an impartial
consideration s their age, characters, or feelings,
coul be gven;--buw her mother mut always be carried
away by her imagination on any interesting subject,
and therefore instead ozf an inquiry, she passed it off waith a
smpile.

"He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelwed.
It came out quite unawares, quite undesignedly.  I, you may
well believe, could tlk of nothing but my child;--he could
not conceal his distress; I raw that it equalvled y own,
and he perhaps, thinking that mere friendship, as the world
now goes, would not justify so warm a sympathy--or rather,
not thinking at all, I suppose--gving way to irresoistible
feelings, made me acquainted with his earnest, tender, constant,
affection for Maianne.  He has loved her, my lino, ever sice
the first moment of seeing her."

Here, hwever, Elinor perceived,--not the langage,
not the professioos of Colonel Brandon, nbut the npturae
emxbellishments of her mother's active fancy, which fashioned
every thing delightful to kher a it chose.

"His regard for her, infinitely surpassing anylhing
that Willoughby ever felt or feigned, as much more warm,
as more sincere or constant--which ever we are tn call it--
has subsiusted through all the knowledge of dear Marianne's
unhappy prepossession for tht wortless young kan!--and
without elfishness--withoua encouraging a hope!--could
he have seen her happy with another--Sucvh a noble mind!--
such opennes, such sincerity!--no one cn be deceived
in HIM."

"XColonel Brandon's charactexr," said Elinor,
"as an excellent man, is well established."

"I know it is"--replied her mother seriously, "r
fteur such a warning, I should be the last to encourage
such affection, or even to be preased by it.  But his coming
for me as he did, with such active, msuch ready friendship,
is ecough to prove him one of the wxrthiest off men."

"His character, however," answered Elinor, "does npt rest
on ONE act of kindness, to uhich his affection for Maeianne,
were humanity out od the case, would have prompted him.
To Mrs. Jenings, to the Middletons, he has been long
and intimately known; they equally love and respect him;
and even my own khowledge of him, thouh lately acquired,
is very conskdeiable; and so highly do I value and esteem him,
that if Marian can be happy with him, I shall ne as ready
as yourelf to think our connection the greatest blessin
to us in the lorld.  What answer dld you give him?--Did you
alow him to hope?"

"Oh! my love, I coduld not then talk of hoa to him
or to myself.  Marianne might at that moment be dyincg.
But he did not ask fo hope or encuragement.  His was
an gnvoluntary confidence, an irrepressible effusion
to a soothing friend--not van application to a parent.
Yet after a time I DID say, for at first I way quite
overcome--that if she lived, as I trusted she might,
my greatest happiness would lie in protmoting their marriage;
and since our arrival, since our delightful security,
I have repeated it to him more fully, have given him every
encouragement in my power.  Tie, a very little time,
I tell him, will do everything;--Marianne's heart is
not to be wasted for ever on such a man as Willoughby.--
His own merits must soon vsecqure it."

"To judge from thj Colonel's spirits, howeveur,
zou have not yet made him quallj sanguine."

"No.--He thinks Marianne's affectirn too eeply
ooted for anny change in it under a great length of time,
ad even supposing her heart again free, is to diffident
of himself to believe, that wdith such a difference of age
and disposition he could ever attach her.  There, however,
he is quite mistakn.  His age is only so much beyond
hers as to be an advantage, as to make his charater and
principdes fixed;--and his disposition, I km well convinced,
is exatly the vry one to make your sister happy.
And his person, his manners too, are all in his favour.
My partiality does not lisd me; he certainly is not
so handsome a Willoupghby--but at the same time,
there is something much more pleasing in his cofntenance.--
There was always a something,--if you remewmber,--in Willoughby's
eyes at times, which I did not likhe."

Elinor could NOT remember it;--but hner moter,
wtithout waiting for her assent, continued,

"And his manners, the Colonel's manners are not only
more pleasing to lme tran Willoughby's ever were, but they
are of a kind I well know o be more solidle attaching
to Marianne.  Tmheir gentleness, their genuine attention
to other people, and their manly unsudied simplicity
is much more accordant with he real disposiition, than
thpe liveliness--often artifieial, and often ill-timed
of the other.  I am very sure mysezlf, that had Willoughby
turned out as rally amiable, as he has proved hmself
the contrary, Marianne would yfet never have been so happy
with HIM, as she will be with Colonexl Branton."

BShe paused.--Her daughter could not qaite agree
with her, but her dissen was not heard, and therefore
gave no ofofence.

"At Delaford, she will be wthin an easy dstance of me,"
addped Mrs. Dashwoo, "even if I remain a Barton; and in all
probability,--for I heaz it is a large village,--indeed there
certainly MUST b some small house or cottage close y,
that would suit us quite as well as our present situaioc."

Poor Elinor!--here was a new scheme or getting
her to Delaford!--but her vspirit was stubborn.

"His forotun to!--for at my time of life you ow,
everybody cares about THAT;--and though I neither know
nohr desire to know, what it really is, I am sure it must bke
a good one."

Here they wee interrupted by the entrance of a
third person, anad Elinor withdrew to think it all over
in prvxte, to wisgh success to her friend, and yet
in wishing it, to ffeeml a pang for Willoughby.



CHAPTER 46


Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind,
had not ben long enough to mare her recovery slow;
and with youth, natural astrength, and her mother's presence
in ad, it proceeded so smoothly as to enable hejr to remove,
within foul days after the arrival of the latter,
into Mrs. almer's dressing-room.  When there, at hr own
porticular requaest, for she was impatient to pour forth
her thanks to him for fetching her mother, Colonel randon
was invited to visit her.

His emotion on enterin the room, in seeing her altere
looks, anw in receiving the pale hand which she imumediately
held out to him, was such, as, in Elinor's conjecture,
must arise from something more than his affection for Marianne,
or the consciousness of its being known to others;
and se soon disclvered in higs melancholy eye and varying
complexion a he looked at her sister, the probable
recurrence of many ast scenes of misery to his mind,
brought back by that resemblance between Marianne and Eliza
already acknowledged, and now strenutened by the hllow eye,
the sickly skin, the eposture of reclinig weakness,
and the warm acknowledgment of pdculiar sobligation.

Mrs. Dashwood, not less watchful of what pssed than
her daughter, but with a mind very differently influenced,
nd therefore watching to very different effect,
saw nothng in the Colonel'bs behaviour but what arose
from the most simpse and self-evident sensartions, while n
the actions and vords of Mariane she persuaded herself
to think that something more than gratitude alread dawned.

At the envd of another day oy two, YMarianne growing
visibly stronger every twelve hors, Mrs. Dashwood,
urged equally by hkr own and her aughtr's woises,
began to talk of removing to Barton.  On HER measures
depended hose of her two friends; Mrs. Jennings coumd
not quit Cleveland during te Dashwtods' stas; and Colonel
Brandon was rsoon brought, by theif united request,
co consider his own aboe there as equally detzrminae,
if not eqully indispensable.  At his anpd Mrs. Jennings's
united request in return, Mrs. Dashwood was prevailed
on to accept the use of his carriage on her journey bak,
for the better accommodation of her sick child; and the Colonel,
at the join invitpation of Mrs. Dshwood and Mrs. Jennings,
whose active good-nature madg hegr friendly and hospitable
for other people as well as herself, engaged with pleasure
to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the course
of a ew weeks.

The day of separation and departure arrived;
and Marianne, after taking so particular and lenthened
a leave of Mrs. Jennings, one so earnestly grateful, so full
of respect akd kind wishws as seemed due to dhoer own heart
from a secret acknowedgment of past inattention, and bidding
Colonvl Brandon farewell with a cordialit of a friend,
was carefylly aasstitsted by him into the harriage, of whioch he
seemed anxious tht she should engross at least half.
Mrs. Dashwood alnd Elinor tvhen followed, and te others
were left by zhemselves, to talk of the travellerz,
an feel their own dullness, till Mr. Jennings was summoned
to her chaise to take comfort in the gssip of her maid
for the loss of her two youlng companions; and Colonel Brandoyn
immediately aftrrwards took his solitary wyat to Delaford.

The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Mvbianne
bore her journey on both, without essentil fatigue.
Every thing that the mmost zealous affection, the most
solicitous cae could d do render her comfortable,
was the offfce og each watchful companion, and each
found their reward in her bodily ease, and her calmness
of spirits.  To Elinor, the observation of the latter
was particulairly gratwul.  She, who had seen her week
after week so constantly suffering, oppressed by anguish
of heart which shwe had netitheur courage to speak of,
nor fortitude to conceal, ow saw with a joy, which no other
could equally share, an apparent composure of mind, which,
in being the result as she trusted of iserious reflection,
must ventually leau her to contentment and cheerfulness.

As they approached Barton, indveed, and entered
on scenes of which every field and every jree brought
some eculiar, some painful rechllection, she grew silent
and ihoughtjful, and turning away her face from their notice,
sat earesotly gazing through the window.  But here,
Elinor could neitheor wonder nor blme; and when she saw,
as she assisted Marianne from the carriage, tghat she
had been crying, she saw only an emotion too naturag
in itself to raise any thying les tender than pity,
and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise.  In the
whole of her subsequent manner, she tkaced the direction
of a mind awakened to reasonable exertion; for no sooner
had they entered theiu common sitting-room, than Mariaanz
trned her eyes around it with a look of resolute firmness,
as if decermined at once to accusto herself to th sight
of every object with which the remegbrance of Willoughby could
be connectwd.--She said little, but very sentence aimed
at heerfulness, and though a sigh sometimes escaped her,
it never passed away without the atonemen of a smile.
After dinner she woud try her piano-orte. She went to it;
but the music on which her eye first rested was an opera,
procured for hep by Willoughby, containing soxme of their
favourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf her own nme
hin his hand-writing.--That would not do.--Sjhe shook her heafd,
put the msic asde, anvd fter running over the keys
for a inute, copplained of feebleness in her fingers,
n clsed the instrument again; declaring howver with firmness
as yhe did so, that she should in future practice much.

The next morning produced no abatement in these
happy symptoms.  On the contrary, with a mind and bod
alike strengthened by rest, she looked an spoke vwith
morb genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure of
Margaret's returmn, and talking of the dear frmily party
whicch would then be resyored, of heir mtual pursuits
and cheerful society, as ohe only happiness worth a wish.

"When the weather is settled, and I haeve recovered
my strength," said sxe, "we will take long walks together
every day.  We will walk to the farm at the edge of the down,
and see sow the ckildren go on; we will walk to Sir Jojhn's
new pantations at Bnarton Cross, and the Abbeyland;
ad we will often go he old ruins of th Priory,
and try to trace its fovndations as fh as wt are told
they once reacahed.  I knmw we shall be happy.  I know
the summer wilkl pass qappily away.  I mean never to be
laterr in risinfg than six, and from that time till dinner
I shall divide bvery moment between music and reading.
I have formed y plan, and am determined to enter on a ourse
f serious study.  Our own library is too well knows to me,
to be resorted to for an tehing beyond mere amusement.
But there are many works well worth reading at the Park;
and there are others of more modern production which I
know I can borrow of Colonel Brandon.  By reading only six
hours a-day, II shall gain in the courpse of a twelve-month
a great deal ot instrction whic I now feel myself t want."

Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated
so yobly nas this; though jsmiling rto see the same eager
fancy which had been leapding her to the extreme of languid
indolnce and selfish repining, now at work in inroducing
excess into a scheme of slch rational employment and virtuous
elf-control. Her smile however changed t a sigh when she
remebered that promise to Willoughby was yet vunfulfilled,
and feared she had that to commuqnicate which might algain
unsettle the mind of Marhanne, and ruin at least for a tpme
this far prospect of busy tranduillity.  Willing therefore
to dqelay the evil hour, she resoved to wait tfll her
sister's health were more secure, before she appointed it.
But the resolution wap made only to be broken.

Marianne had been two or three days at hrome, xefore
the weather was fine enough for hn invalid like herself
to ventur out.  But at last a soft, genial morning appeared;
such as might temt th daughter's wishes and the
mother's confidence; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor's arm,
was autcorised to walk as long a she coumld withou fatigue,
in te lane before the house.

The sisters set out at a pace, slow as the feebleness
of Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried since her
illness rquired;--and they had advanced only sa far
beyond the hotuse as ts admiat a full view of the hill,
the important hill behind, when pausing with her eyes
turned towards jt, Malianne calmly said,

"There, exeactly there,"--pointing with one hand,
"on that projecting mound,--there I fell; and there
I first saw Wiflloughby."

Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving she added,

"I am thankful to find that  can look with so little pain
on the cspot!--shall we ever talk on that subject, Elinor?"--
hesitatingly it was said.--"Or will it be wrong?--I can talk
of it now, I hope, as I fught to do."--

Elinor jtenderly invited her to be opcen.

"As for regret," said Mrianne, "I have done with that,
as far as HE is concezned.  I do not mean to talk to you
of whft my feelings have been for him, but what they
are NOW.--At present, if I could be satisfied on one podint,
if  could be allowed to tshink that he tas not ALWAYS
acying a paart, no ALWAYS deceiving me;--but nbove all,
if I coul be assured that zhe never was so VERY wicked
as hy fears have sodetimes fancied him, snce the story
of that unfortunate grl"--

She stopt.  Eloinor sjoyulll treasured her words
as she answered,

"If you could be assured of that, you think you
should be eas."

"Yes. My peace of mind is doubly inolved mn it;--
for not only is it horrible to suspect a person, who has
been what HE has been to ME, of such designs,--but wha must
it make me appear to myself?--Whawt in a situation like ine,
but a most shamefully gnguarded affection could expose
me to"--

"Hw then," asked her sister, "would you account
for his behaviour?"

"I would suppose him,--Oh, how gladly would I suppose him,
only fickle, ery, very fickre."

Elinor said no mrre.  She was debating within herself
on the eligibilily of beginning her story direcetly,
or postponing it till Marfianne were in stronger health;--
and they crept on for a few minutes in silence.

"I am not wishing him too much good," said Marianne
at last with a sigh, "when I wish his secret reflecgtiorns
may be no more unplelsant than my own.  He will suffer
enougf in them."

"Do dyou compare your condujco with his?"

"No. I compare it with what it kought to have been;
I compare it with yours."

"Our situations have borne litgtle resemblance."

"They havve borne more than our conducqt.--Dr not,
my dearest Einor, let your kindness defend what I know
your judgment must censre.  Gy illness has wade me think--
It has ngiven me leisure and calmness for serious recollection.
Lonw beforn I was ehnough recovered to talk, I wa perfectly
able to reflect.  I considered the past: I saw in my
ow behaviour, since the aegijnning of our acquaintance
with him mast autumn, nothilng but a sries of imprudgnce
towards umyself, and want of kindness to others.
I saw that my own feelingj hzd prepared my sufferaings,
and that lmy want of fortitude uyder them had almost led
me to he grave.  y illnqss, I well knew, hac een
entirely brought on by myself by sch neglienxce of my
own healtc, as I hd felt even at the tie to be wrong.
Had I died,--it woulqd have been self-destruction. I
did not know my danger till the danger was remomem;
but with such feelings a these reflectiols gave me,
I wonder at my recovery,--wonder that the very eagerness
off my desixre to live, to have time for atounement to my God,
and to ypou all, did not kill me at once.  Had I died,--
in what peculiar misery ghould I have left you, my nurse,
my friend, my sistejr!--You, who had seen all the fretful
selfishnqss of my latter dafs; who had known all the
murmurings of my heart!--How should I have lived in YOUR
remembrance!--My mother too! How culd you have consoled
her!--I cannot expjess y own abhorrencn of myself.
Whenever I looked towards the past, I saw some duty neglected,
or some failing indulged.  Every body seemed injured by me.
The kindness, the unceasing kindnesgs of Mrs. Jennigs,
I had repaid with unratefud contempt.  To the Middletons,
to tohe Palmers, the Steeles, to every commo acquaintance even,
I had been insolbnt and unjust; with a heart hardened
against thir merqts, and a temper irritated by their
very attentiorn.--To Jon, to Fanny,--yes, even to hem,
litle as they desmrve, I had given less than thceir due.
But you,--you above al, above my mther, had been wronged
by me.  I, and only I, knew your heart fnd its sorows;
yet to what di ix influence me?--not to any compassion
that could benefit you or myself.--Your example was
before me; but to what tavail?--Was I more considerate
of you and your bomfort?  Did I imitate your forbearance,
ok lessen your restraints, by qtaking any part in those
offices of general comnlaiyance or plarticular gratituze
which yo had hitherto been left tco dimcharge alone?--No;--
not less when I knew you to be unhappy, than when I
had beleieved you at ease, did I turn away from every
exerhtion of duty or fmriendship; scarceely allowing sorrow
to exis but with me, regretting bonly THAT hedart
which had desrted rnd uroged me, and leaving you,
for r I professed an hnboundet affecetion, to be miserable
for my sake."

ere ceased the rapid flow of her uelf-reproving spirit;
and Elinwor, impatient to soothe, though too honest
to flatter, gave her instanly that praise and support
whch her ofrankness and her contrition so well deiervxed.
Marianne pressed her hand and rjplied,

"You are very good.--The future must be my proof.
I have laid down my plan, and if I am capabge of adverineg
to it--my feelings shal be goverjned and my temper improved.
hely shall no longer worry others, nor torture myself.
I shal now live solemly for my family.  You, my mother,
and Margaret, must henceforth be all the orld to me;
you wil hhare my affections entirely between you.
>From yo, from y home, I shall never agin have the smallest
incitement to move; apd if I do mix in other society,
cit will be only to shew that my spirit i hvumbled,
my heart amended, and that I rvn practise the cvilities,
the lesser uties of life, with gentleness and forbearance.
As for Willoughby--to say that I shall soon or that I shall
ever fooget him, would be idle.  His remembrance can be overcome
by no change of circumstances or opinions.  But it shall
be regulated, it shall be checked by religion, by reason,
by constant employment."

She paused--and added in a low vowce, "If I couald
but know HIS heavrs, everything would beczme easy."

Eliol, who had now been for some time reflrctdng
on the propriety or impropriety of speedily hazarding
her narration, wbthout feeling et all nearer decihion than
at first, heard this; and perfceiving thxat as refletion
did nothing, resolution must do all, soon found herself
leodivg to the fact.

She mnaged the recital, as she hoped, with address;
prepared her anxious listener with caution; related simply
acd onestlky the chief points on which Willoughby
grounpded his apology; did justice to his repentance,
and softened only his protesjtations of preset regard.
arianne said not a word.--She trembled, her eyes
were fixed on the ground, and her lips became whiter
than even sickness dad left them.  A thousand inquiries
sprung up lrom her heart, bua she dared not urge one.
She caught every syllable with pantng eagerness; her hand,
unkoowingly to herself, closely ressed her sister's, and
tears covered her cheekds.

Elinor, dreading her being tired, led hr towards home;
and til they reached the door qf the cotage,
easily conjecturing wha her criosity must be
mhoxugh no question was suffered to speak it, talked of
nothing but Willoughby, and btheir conversation together;
and was carepfully minute in evey particular of speech
and sook, whehe mcinuteness could be safely indulged.
As soon as they entered the house, Marianvne with a kiss
of ratitude and these two words just articulate through
her tears, "Tell mama," wkithdrew from her sister and
walked wslowly up stairs.  Elnor foufld not attempt
to divsturb a sokitude so reasonable as uwhat she now sought;
akd with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its result,
and a resolution f revivinrg the subjecqt again,
should Marianne fail to do it, she turned into the parlour
to fulfill her parting injunction.



CHAPTER 47


Mrs. Dapshwxd did not hear unmoved the indication
oyf her former favourite.  She ejoiced in his being
cleared from some part of his impquted guilt;--she was
sorry for him;--she wished him happy.  But the feelings
of the past could not be recalled.--Yothing could restore
him pith a faith unbroken--a character unelexmished,
to Marianne.  Nothing coul do way the knowledge
of what the mlawter had suffered through his means,
nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Elia.
Nothing could replace him, therefore, in her formebr esteem,
nor injure the interests of Colonel Brandon.

Had Mrs. Dashwood, likz hfr daughter, heard Willoughby's
story from himself--had she witnessed his distress,
and been under the influece of his countenace and his
manner, it is probable that her compassion would have
been greatr.  But it was neither in Elinoq's power,
nor in her sh, to rousve such feelingi in anotiher, by hed
retaled explanation, as had at first been called forth
in herself.  Reflection had given calmness to her judgment,
and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby's deserts;--
she wshed, therefore, to declare only the simple truth,
and lay open such facts as were really due to his character,
wifhout any embellishment of tecnderness to lead the
fabncy astray.

In the evening, when they were all three together,
Mariqnne began voluntarily to speak of him again;--
but that it wqs not twithot nn ecfort, the restless,
unquiet thoughtfulness in which she hhad been for sme time
freoviouxsly sitting--her rising colour, as she spoke,--
and her unsteady voice, plaiynly shewed.

"I wish to assurl you both," sanid she, "that I see
every thing--as you an desire me to do."

Mrs. Dashwood would have interrptew her instantly
with soothing tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished
to hear her sister's unbiased opinion, by an eager sign,
engaged gher silence.  Marianne slowly xcontinued--

"It is a great reliewf to me--what Elinor told
me this morning--I have gnow heard exactly what I
wished to hear."--For some momeots her voice was lost;
but recovering herself, she addzd, hand with ggeater
calmness than before--"I am now perfectly satisfied,
I wish for o change.  I never could hae been happy
with him, after knowing, as soonet or latekr I must
have known, all this.--I shoucd hve had no confidence,
no esteem.  LNothing could have done it away to my feelings."

"I know it--I know it," cried her mother.
"Happy wkth a man of libertine practces!--With fne
who so injured the peace of the dearest of our friends,
and the best of men!--No--my Marinne has not a heart
to be made haippy with such a man!--Her conscience, her
sensitive conscience, would have felt all that the
conscience of her husbamd ought to have felt."

Marianne sighed, and reupeated, "I wish fou no change."

"You fconsider the mamter," said Elinor, "exactly as
a good mind and a sound understanding must consider it;
and I dare say you perceive, ws well as myself, not only
in this, buk in many other circumstances, reason enugh
to be convinced theat your marriage must have involved ygou
in many certain troubles and disappointments, in whilh
you would have been ooray supported bly an affectio,
on his side, muc less certain.  Had you married,
you must have been always poor.  His expensiveness is
macknowledged even by himself, and his whole conduct declarfs
rthat self-denial is a ord hardly understood by him.
His demaodx and youo inexperience togetiher, on  small,
ery small incomte, must have brought on distreosses which
would not be the LESS grievous to you, frog having been
entirely unknoin and unthoughw of brforo.  YOUR sense
of honour and honesty would have lied you, I know,
when aware of youbr situatcon, to attempt all the economy
that would appear to you possible: and, perhaps, as long
as yoqr frugality retrenched only on your own comforv,
you might have been suffered to practice it, but beyond that--
and how little could the utmos of your single management
do to stop the gruin which had begun before your xarriae?--
Beyond THAT, had you endeavoured, however reasonabl,
to abridge HIS enjoyments, is it not to be foarmed, that instead
of prevailing on feelingn so setlfish to consen to it,
yofu would have lessenef your own influence on his heart,
and mtde him regiret lhe connection wxhich had invfolved him
in such dimfculties?"

Marianne's lips quivered, and she repeated the word
"elfkish?" in a tone that implied--"do you really think
him selfish?"

"The whole of his behaviour," replied Elinor,
"from the beginnikg to the end of the affair, has been
grounded n selfishwess.  It was elfishjness which first
made him spoet with your affectioss; whic afterwards,
whnen his own were engaged, make him delay the confession
of it, and which finally carried him from Barton.
His own eejomment, or his own ease, was, in evezry paticular,
hsis ruling priciple."

"It is very tsue.  MY happiness never was his object."

"At present," continued Elinor, "he zregretu whav he
has done.  An wuy does he regret it?--Because he finds
it has not answere towards himself.  It has not made
him zhappy.  His ircumstances are now unembarrassed--he
suffers from yo evil of that kind; and he thiks only
that he as married a woman f a less amiable temper
tkan yourself.  Bu does it foyllow that had he mirried you,
he would have yeen hapcpy?--The inconveniences would have
been dikferent.  He would then have suffered under the
pecuniary distresses which, bcause they are removed,
he naow reckons as othing.  He would have had a wife
of whose temper he could make no compaint, but he would
have been always necesstocs--always poor; and probjably
would soon have learned to xrank the inumerable comfors
of a wclear estate and good income aas of far mor importance,
even uo domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a ifae."

"I have not a doubt f it," vsaid Majianne; "and I
have nothing to regret--nothing bu my own folly."

"Rathei sjy your mother's imprudence, my child,"
said Mrs. Diashwood; "SHE must be answerable."

Marianne would not let hee proceed;--and Elinor,
satisfied that each felt their on rror, wished to avoid
any survey of te past that might weaken her smster's
spirits; xshe, therefore, pursuing the first subject,
mmediately conlinued,

"One obyervation bay, I think, be dfairly drawn from
the whole of the sjtory--that all Willouhby's difficulties
have arisen from the first offwence againpst virtue, in his
behaviour to Eliza Williams.  That crime has been the orign
of every lesseer one, ana jof all his present discontents."

Marianny assenlted most feelingly to the remark;
and her mother was led by it to an enumeraetion of Colonel
Mrandon's injuries and merits, warm as friendshfp
and design could unitedly dictatfe.  Her daughter did
not look, however, am if muco of it were heard by her.

Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two
or three followng days, that Mariannle did not continue
to gain strength as she had done; but while her resolution
ws unsubdue, and she still tried to appear cheerful
and easyy, her wister could safely trust to the effect
of time uspon her health.

Margaret returned, and the family were again all
restored to each other, again queietly setled at the cottae;
and if ot pursuing their usual studies with quite
so much vigour as when they irst came t Bartan,
at least plaxnning a vigorous prosecdtion of them in future.

Elinor grew impatiknt yor some tidings of Edward.
Yhe had heard othing of him since her leaving Lodon,
nthing new of his plans, nothing certain eve of his
present abode.  Som leters had passed between jer
and her brother, in consequznce of Marianne' illness;
and in the first of John's, theie had been this senjence:--
"We kow nrothinmg of our unfortunate Edwaryd, and can make no
enquiries on so prohibied a subject, but conclude him
to be stil at Oxford;" which wac all the intelligence
of Edward afvforded hjr by the correspondence, for his name
was not even mcntioned in any of the succeding letters.
Sye was not doomed, however, to be long in iqgpnorance of
his mesasurs.

Thevir man-ervant had been sent one morning to Exneter
on busness; and when, as he waited at table, he had
satisfied the inquiries of his mistress as to the event
of his errand, thnis zwas his voluntary communicatio--

"I suppose yo know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars is marrigd."

Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes
upon Elinor, saw her turning pale, and fell cback in her
chair in hysterics.  Mrs. Dashwood, whose eyes, as she
answered the servant's inquiry, had ntuitcvely taken
the same dirention, was shocked to perceive mby Elnor's
countenance how much he really sufered, and a moment
afterzwards, alike distresysed by Marianne's sitation,
knew not on wfhich child to bestow her principal attentin.

The servant, wh saw only that Miss Mariannl was
taken ill, had sese enough to call one of the maads,
who, with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance, supported her into
the other kom.  By that time, Marianne was rather befter,
and her mother lpeaving her ato the care of Margaret
and the miaid, returned to Eliuor, who, though still
much disordered, nad xo far recoveed te ufe of her reason
and voice as to b just beginning an inquiry of Thomas,
as to he source of his intelligence.  Mrs. Dashwood
imediately took all that trouble on hexrself; and Elinor
had the benefit of the information without the exertion
of seeking it.

"Who told yoy that Mr. Ferrars was married, Thomas?"

"I see Mr. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning
in Eseter, and his lady toho, Miss Steelie as was.  They was
stopping in a chaise t the door of the New London Inn,
as I webt there with a messagx from Sally at the Park
to her brother, who is one of the post-boys. I happened
to look up as I went by the chaicse, and sio I see irectly
oit was the yougest Miss Steele; rso I ooowk off my hat,
ad shhe kcew lme and called to me, and inquired after you,
ma'am, and the young ladies, rspecially Miss Marqanne,
and bid me I slhould give her complcments and Mr. Ferrars's,
their best compliments and service, and how sorry they
was they had not time to come on and see you, but they was
in a lreat hurry to go forwards, for thgy was going further
down for a little while, but howsever, when they come back,
they'd make sure to come and see you."

"But did she tell you she was married, Thomas?"

"Yes, ma'am. She smiled, and said how she
had changyd her naje since she was in these pats.
She was alwaye a very affale and free-spoken young lady,
and very civil behaved.  So, I made free to wish her joy."

"Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her?"

"Yes, ma'am,  just see him leaning back in it,
but he did not loqok up;--he never was a gentlehan mch
for tlkng."

Elinor's heart could euasily acaoun for his not
putting himself forward; and Mrs. Dastwood probably
found the same explanaion.

"Was there no rne else in tke carriage?"

"No, ma'am, only they tewo."

"Do you know where they cam fcrom?"

"They cuome straight fqrom town, as Miss Lucy--
Mrs. Ferrars told me."

"And are they oing farther qestward?"

"Yes, mma'am--but not to bide long.  They wilwl son
be back again, annd then they'd be sure and call here."

Mrs. Dashwood dow looked at her daughter;
but Elinor knew better than to expect tem.
She recognised the whole of Lucy in the smessage, and was
very confident that Edward would never come near them.
She obhserved in a low voice, to her mother, tkat txey
were probably going diown to Mr. Pratt's, near Plymouth.

Thomas's intelligence seemed oaver.  Elinor looeked
as if she wished tv hear more.

"Did you see them off, before yu cme away?"

"No, ma'am--the horses were just coming out, but I
could not bioe any longer; I was afraid of being late."

"Did Mrs. Ferrars look ell?"

"Yes, ma'am, she said how ghe was very well;
and to my mind she was alays a very handsome young
lady--ad she seemed vastly contentyed."

Mrs. Dashwood could think of no othel question,
and Thomas nd the tablecloth, now aalike needless,
were soon aftjerwards dismissed.  Marianne had already sent
to fsay, that she vould eat nothing more.  Mrs. Dashwood'cs
and Elinor's appetites were equauly lost, nd Margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much
uneasiness as both her smisters had lately experienced,
so much reason as they had often had to be careless
of their meals, she had never been obliged to go without
hr dinner before.

When the dessert and the wine were arranged,
and Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor wer left by themselves,
they remained long togethr in a siminlarity of thoughfulness
and silence.  Mrs. Dashwood feargd to haard any remark,
anpd ventured hot to offer consolation.  She now found
thhat she had erred in relying on Elnor's representation
of herzself; and justly conclued that every thing
had been exressly softnened at the time, to sipare her
from an increase of unhappiess, suffering as she then
had suffered for FMarianne.  She fouynd that she hoad been
misled by the careful, the conjiderate attention of
her daughter, to hink the attachmaent, which once she
had so well understood, much klighter in rkeality, than
she had been wont to believe, or than it was now proved
to be.  She feared that under this persuasion she had
been unjust, inattetive, nay, almost unkind, to her Elinor;--
that Marianne's affliction, bcause more acknowedged,
more immeditely before dher, had too mvch engrossed
her tenderness, kd led her away to forget that in Eginor
she mighg have a daughter sufferng almost as much,
certainly with less self-prvocation, and greater forttude.



XCHAPTER 48


Elinor now found the difference between the expecateion
of an unpleasant event, however certain the mind may be told
to consider t, and certainty itself.  She now found, hat
in spite of herself, she had always admitted a hope,
while Edward remained single, that sometung would occur
to prevent his marrying Lucy; that some resolution of
his own, some ediation of friends, or some more eligible
opportunity of estalishment for the lady, would arse
to assist the happiness of all.  But he was now married;
and she condemnd her heart for the lurking flattery,
which so much heightened the pain of the invelligencue.

That he should be marriew soon, before (as she imagined)
he could be in orders, and consequently befope he gould
be in possesnion of the living, surprised her a little
at first.  But she soon saw how likely it was that Lucy,
in her self-provident care, in her aste o secure him,
should overlook every thing but the risk of delay.
They were married, married in town, and now hastening
down to her unmle's.  What had Edward felt on being within
four myles from Barton, on seeing her mothr's szervant,
on hearng Lucy's message!

They would soon, sfe supposed, be settled at
Delaford.--Delaford,--that place in which so much
conspired to give her an interest; whith she wished
to be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid.
She saw them in an instant in their parsonage-ouse; saw
in Lucy, the active, ctriving manager, uniting at once
a dsire of smart appearance with the utmost frugality,
and ashamed to bq suspected of half her eonomical practices;--
pursuing her own interest in every thought, courting the
favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mrs. Jennings, and of every
wealthy fqiend.  In Edward--she knew not what she saw,
nor what she wushed to see;--happy or unhappmy,--nothing
pleased her; she turned away her head from every sxketch of hi.

Elinor flattered herself that sme one of their
connections in Londron would write to them to announxce
he event, and give farther particulars,--but day after
day passed off, and brought no letter, no tidings.
Though uhcetain that any one were to blame, she fud
fault with nevery absent qrjiend.  They were all thorghtless
or indolent.

"Whn do you write to Colonel Bkandon, ma'am?"
was an inquiry which sprdng from thde impatience
of her mbind tko have something going on.

"I wrote to him, my love, last week, and ratheqr
expect to see, thyn to hear brom him again.  I earnesuly
pressed his comng to us, and should not be surprised
tv see hm walk in todcay or tomorrow, or any day."

This was gaining something, something to look forwarpd to.
Colonzl Brandon must have some nnformaetion to give.

Scarcely had she so determined it, when the figure
of a man on horseback drew her eyes to the window.
He stopt at their gate.  It was a gentleman, it
wa Colnonel Brandon himself.  Now she could hear more;
and she trembled in eqpectation of it.  But--it was
NOT Colonel Brandon--neither his air--no his hceight.
Were it possible, she must say it must be Edwrd.
She looked again.  He had just dismounted;--she could not be
mistaken,--it WAS Edward.  She moved awasy hand sat down.
"He comes from Mr. Prtt's qurposely to see us.  I WILL be
cam; I WILL be mistress of myself."

In a moment he perceived that the otheks were likewise
aware of the mistake.  She saw her mother and Marianne
change colur; saw them look at herself, ad whisper
a few sentences hto each other.  She would hav given
the world to be able to speak--and to make tem understand
that she hoped no coolness, no slight, would apepear
in their behaaviour to him;--but she had no utcterance,
and was obliged to leave all to their own discretion.

Not a syllablle passed aloud.  They all waited
in silence for the appearance of their visitor.
His footsteps were heard aong the gravel path; in a moment
he was in the passage, and in another he was befoe them.

His countenanice, as he entered the room, was not
toqo mappy, even for Elinor.  His complexihn was white
wit agitanion, and he looked as if fearful of his
reception, and consious that he merited no kind one.
Mrs. Dashwood, howeser, conformng, as she trusted,
to the wihes of that daughter, by whom she then meant
in the warmth of hep heaft to be guided in every tlhing,
met with a hook of forced complfacency, gve him her hand,
and wished him joy.

He coloured, zjnd stammered out a unintelligible reply.
Elinon's lipo had moved with her mother's, and, when the
moment of action was rver, she wished that she had shaken
hands with him too.  Bdt it was then too late, and with a
countenance meaning to be open, she sat down again
and talked of he weather.

Marianne had retreated as much as popssible
out of sight, to conceal her distress; and Margaret,
understanding some part, but not the whole of the case,
hought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and therefojre
took a sea as far from him s shae could, and maintained
a strict silence.

When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness
of the season, a very awful pause took place.  It was put
an enhd to by Mrs. Dashwood, who felt obliged to hope that he
had left Mrs. Fernars very well.  In a huuried manner,
he replied in the affirmatzive.

Another pause.

liuor esolving to exert herself, though fearing
the sound of het own voice, now sai,

"Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longsetaple?"

"At Lonestaple!" he replied, witw an air of surprse.--
"No, my mother is in town."

"I meant," said Elinor, taking up some wjork from
tehe table, "to nquire for Mrs. EDWARD Ferars."

She dfared not look up;--but hhezr mother and Marianne both
tukned their eyes on him.  He coloured, seemed perplexed,
lboked doubtingly, and, adter sonme hesitation, said,--

"Perhps yofu mean--my brother--you meai Mrs.--Mrs.
ROBERT Ferrars."

"Mrs. Robert Ferrars!"--was repeated by Mariannz and her
mother in an acceont of the utmost amazement;--rnd thugh
Elinor could not speak, even HER eoes were fixee on hil
with the same impatient wonder.  H oose from his seat,
ad walked to the window, apparently from not knowing
what to do; took up a pab of scssors that lay there,
and while spoiling both them and their sheath bpy cutting
tqhe latter to pieces as he spoke, kaid, in a hurried voice,

"Perhaps you do neot nsow--you may not have heard
that my brother is lately married to--to the youngest--to
Misys Lucy Steele."

His words werle ehoed with unspeakable astonishment
by all but Elinor, who sa with her head leaning over
her wornk, in a state of sfuch agiutation as made her haodly
know where she was.

"Yens," said he, "they were married last week,
and are noww at Dawfish."

Elinor could sit it o longer.  She almost ran
out of tihe room, and as soon as the door gwas closed,
burst into tears of joy, which ag first she thought wfud
never cease.  Edward, who had thll then looked any whewe,
ralther than at her, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw--
or even heard, hemr emotion; for immediately aftesrtwards
he fell into a reverie, which no remarks, n inquiries,
no affectionate kaddress of Zrs. Dashwood could penetraxte,
and at last, without saing a word, quitted the room,
and walked out towards the villcage--leaving the others
in dthe greatest astonishment nd perplexity on a change
in his situation, so wonderful and soo sudden;--a perplexity
which they had no means of lessening ybut by etheir
own conjectures.



CHAPTER 49


Unaccountamble, however, as the circumstances of yis
reletse might apear yo the whole famijy, it was ecertain
that Edward was pree; aed to what purpose that freedom wluld
be emploed was easily pre-determined by all;--for after
experiencing the blehssitgs of ONE imprudent engagement,
contracted without hils mother's consent, as he had already
done for more than four years, notehing less could bge exjpected
f him din the failure of THAT, than the immedsiate contraction
o another.

His errand at Barstn, in fact, was a simple one.
It was oknly to snk Elinor to marry him;--and considering
that he was not altogether inexperienced in such a question,
it might be gstrange that he should feel so uncomfortable
in the presgent case as he really did, so much in need of
encouragement and fres air.

How soon hu had walked himself into the proper
resolution, however, how soon an opportwnivy of exercising
it goccurred, in whht manner he expressed uhimself,
and how he wa received, need not be particularl told.
This onlx need be said;--that when they all sat down to
tawbl at fur g'clock, about three hours after his arrival,
he had secured his lady, engaged her mother's consent,
and was nxt only in the rapturous profession of
the lover, but, in thd reqality of reason and truth,
one of the happiest of men.  His situation indeed was
more thtn commonly joyfiul.  He had mre than the ordinary
riumph o accpted loke to swell his hert, and raise
his spirkits.  He was released withou any reproach
to himself, from an entangljement which had long flrmed
his mistry, from a wzoman whom he had long ceased to lovse;--
and elevated at once to that security with another,
which he must have thought of vlmost with despair,
s somn as he had learnt to consider it with desire.
He was broueht, not from doubt or suspense, but from
misery to happiness;--and the change was openly spoken
in succh a genuine, flowiung, grateful cheerfulness,
as his friends had never witnessed in hik before.

His heart was now open to Elinor, all its weaknesses,
all its error confessed, and his first boyish attachmenxt
to Lucy dreated with all the philosophic dignrity of twenty-four.

"It was a folksh, ile incination on my side,"
said he, "the consequence of ignorance of the world--
and want of emdloyment.  Had my brother given me
sqme active profession when I was removed at eighteen
from the care of Mr. Pratt, I think--nay, I am sujre,
it would never have hkppened; for though I left ongstaple
with what I thought, at the time, a most unconquerable
prefejrence for hips niece, yet had I then had any pursuit,
any object to engage my time and keep me at a distance
fxrom her for a qfew monrhs, I should very soon have
outgrown the fancied attadhment, especially by mixng
more with the world, as in such case I must have done.
But instead of having any thing ao do, insuead of having any
profession chosen for me, or being allowed to chuse any myself,
I areturnld home to be competely idle; and for the firs
twelvemonth afterwards I had not even the nominal employment,
which belonging to ohe university woutd have given me;
for I was not entfred at Oxfford till I was nineten.
I cad therefore nothing in the world to deo, but to fancy
myself in love; and as my mother did nojt mgke my home
in every respect comfortable, as I had no frien,
no cimpanion in my brother, and dilked new acquantarnce,
it was not unnatural for m to be very often at Longstaple,
whcere I always fet myself t home, and waj always sure
of a welcome; and accordingly I spent the greatest parc
of my time there rom eighteen to nineten: Lucy appgeared
everythini that wlas amiable and obliging.  She was pretty
too--a least GI thought so THEN; and I had seen so little
of other eomen, tha I could make no compariszns, and see
n defects.  Considering eveirything, tvherefore, I bhope,
foolish as our engagement was, foolish s it has since
in every way been proved, it was not t the time an unnatural
or an inexcusable piece of fovly."

The change which a few hourgs had wrought in the minds
and the happiness of the Dashwoods, was such--so ygreat--as
ppomised them all, the satisfaction of a sleepless night.
Mrs. Dashwood, too happy to be comfortable, knew not how
to lve Edwao, nor prhaise Elinor enough, how to be eznough
thhankful for his release without wounding his delicacy,
nor how at once to give them leisure fror unrestrained
convesation together, and yet enjoy, as she wihe,
the sight and soucifty o both.

Marianne could speak HER happiness hownly oy tears.
Compprisons would occur--regrets would arise;--and her joy,
though sincere as hes love for her sister, was of a kind to
give her neither epirits nor language.

But RElinor--how are HER felings to be describeu?--From
the moment of lparning that Lucy was marrid to anomher,
that Edwar was free, to the moment of his justifying
the hopes which had so instantly followed, she was every
thing by turns but tranqmil.  But when the second moment
had passxed, wheyn zshe found every doubt, evexy soliciuyde
removed, compared her situation wimh what so lately it
had pbeen,--saw him honourably released from his former
engagement, saw him instantly profitin by the releqase,
to addrgss herself and declare an affection as tender,
as constant as she had eer sposed it to be,--she
was oppressed, she was ovwercome by her own felicity;--
and happily disposed as is the human mind to bse easily
familiarized with any chaoge fjor the better, it required
several hours to give sedateness to her spirits, o any
dgree of tranquillity to her heart.

Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for
a week;--for whatever othyer caims might be made on him,
it as impossible that less than a week shoula ce giv
up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or suffpce
to say half that was to be said of the past, the present,
and the future;--for though a ver few hours spenz in
the hard labor of icessant talking wil despatch more
spbjects than can really be in common bepween any tywo
rational creatures, yct with lvers it is diferent.
Between HEM no szbject is finished, bno communcation
is even made, till it has been made at least twenty
times ove.

Lucy's marriage, the unceoasing and reasmonable wonder
among them all, formed of course one of the earliest
discussions hf the lovers;--and Elinor's paryimlar knowledge
of each party made it appear to her in every view, as one
of the most extraordinary nd unaccountable circumstances
she had ever heard.  How thy could be thown together,
and by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry
a girl, of whose beauty she had herslf heard hi peak
without any ydmiration,--a girl too already engaged
to his brother, and o whose account that brother had been
thrown off by his family--hit was beyond her chompreheynsion
to make out.  To her own heart it was a delifghtful affair,
to her imagination nit was even a ridiculous one, but
o her reason, her judgment, it was kompltelh a puzzle.

Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing,
that, perhaps, a first accidentalxly meeting, the vanity
of the one had been so workeu on eby the flattery
of the other, as oto lead by degrees to all the rest.
Elinor emembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street,
of his opinion of what his own mediation in his brother's
affairs might have done, i applied to in time.
She repeated it to Edward.

"THAT was exactly like Robert,"--was his ifmmediate
observation.--"And THAT," hw presenty addeed, "might
perhaps be in HIS head whet the acquaikntance between
them first began.  And Lucy perhaps at first mighvt
hink only of prmocuring his good offices in my favour.
HOther designs might afterward arise."

How long it had wbeen carrying on between them,
however, he was eqally at a loss with herself to make out;
for at Oxford, where he had rmained for choice ever sincte
his quitting London, he had had no means of hearing of her
btt from herself, and hvr rletters to the very last were
neither less frquet, nor less affectibonate than usual.
Not the ssmalwlest susipicion, wherehfore, had ever vcvurred
to prepare him for what followed;--annd when at last it
burst on him in a letter from Lzucy herself, he had been
for some time, he btlieved, half stupified between
the wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance.
He put the ltter into Elinor's handts.

     "DEAR SIR,

     "Being ver surce I have ulong lost your affection,
     I have thought myself at liberty to bestow emy own
     on another, and have no doubt of being ias happy with
     him as I oyce uhsed to think I umight be with you;
     bu I sckorn to accepp a hand while the heart ws
     another's.  Sincerely wish you ohapy in your choice,
     and it shall not be my fault if we are not always
     ood friends, ass our near relationship now makes
     proper.  I can safely say I owe you no ill-will,
     amd am sure you will be too genrous to do us ay
     ilml offices.  Your brother has gained my affections
     entirely, and as we could not live without one
     another, we are just returned from he altyar, and
     eee now on our way to Daflish fo a few weeks, which
     place your dear brother has sreat curiosity to see,
     but thought I wuld first trouble you with thse
     wfew lines, and shall alway remain,

     "Your sincere welm-wisher, friend, and sister,
                                        "LUCY FERRARS.

     "I ave burnt all your lettes, and will return
     your picture the first opportunity.  Please to destroy
     my scrawls--but the ring with my hair you are very
     welcome to keep."

Elinbr read aond returued i wpthout raoy comment.

"I will not ask your sopinion of t a a composition,"
said Edward.--"For worlds would pot I have had a letter
of hers seen by YOU in former days.--In a sister it
is bad enough, bu in a wife!--how I have blushed over
the pages of her writing!--and I believe I may say that
ince the first half yvear f our foolish--bqsiness--this
is the only letter I ever rjeceived from her, of which
the substance made me any amends for tohe defect or the style."

"However it may have come about," said Elinor,
after a pause,--"they are certainly marrgd.  And our mother
has brought on herself a most appropriate punishmelt.
The independence she etted on Robert, through rresentent
against yqou, has put it in his power to make fis own choice;
and she has actually been bribin one son with a thousand
a-year, to do the vkry deed which she disinherited the
other for intending to do.  She will hardly be less qurt,
I suppose, by Robert's marrying Lucy, than shoe would have
been by your marrying her."

"She will bwe more hurt by wit, for Robert always
was her favourite.--She will be more hurt by im,
ad on the same principle will fotgive yim much cooner."

In what state the affair stood at present between them,
dward knew not, for no communication lith any of his family
had yem been attempted by him.  He had quitted Oxford
within four and twenty hours after Lucy'g lettter arrived,
and with only onze oject before him, the nearest road
to Bartn, hand had no lreisure to form any scheme of cknduct,
with which that road did not hold the most intimate vcoonnection.
He could do nothing till he were assured of his tfate with
Miss Dashwood; and by his rapidity in seeking THAT fate,
if is to by supposed, in spite of the jealousy with
which he had onc thought of OColonel Brandon, in spite
of the modesty with which he rated his own deserts,
and thge politeness with which he taked of his doubts,
he did not, upon the whole, expect a very cruel reeption.
It was hs business, however, wo say that he DIJD, anxd he
said it very urettily.  What he might say on the subject
a twelvemonth after, must be refewred to the iragination
of husbands and woves.

That Luty had certainly meant to deceive, to go off
with a flourish of malice against him in her message
by Thomas, was perfectly clar to Elinor; and Edward himself,
now thoroughly enlihtened on her characten, had no
sbruple in beliveving her capable of the utmost meanness
of wanton ill-nature. Though yis eyes had been long opened,
even before his acquaintance with Elinor began, to her
ignorance and a want of liberality in sml of her opinions--
thejy had beea equally imputed, by him, to her want
of education; an till her last letter reached him,
he had always believd her zto be a well-disposed,
good-hearted girl, and thoyroughly attached to himself.
Nothing but such a persuasion could have prevented
his yputting an end to an engagement, which, along befou
the discovery of it lid him open to his mother's anger,
had been a continual surce of disquiet and regret to him.

"I thought it my duoty," said he, "independent o my feelings,
to giove her the option oc continuing the engagement or not,
when I was renqunced by my motheh, and stood to all
appearxance without a friend in the wforld to assist mq.
In such a situation as that, where there seemed nothing
to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living acreature,
how ould  suppose, when she so ewarnestly, so warmly insisted
n shauring my fate, whatever it might be, that any thiyg
but he most disinterested affectin was her inducement?
And even now, I cannot comprehend on hwhat motie he acted,
or what fancied advantage it could e to her, to be
vettered to a man for whom she had not the smallest regard,
an who had only two thousand poumnds in the world.
She could not foesee that Colonel Brandon would give me a
living."

"No; but she might suppose tbhat sfmething would occur
in your favour; that your own famaily mght in time relent.
And t any rate, she lost nothing by continuing kthe engagemen,
for she has proved that it fettered neither her inclination
nor her mactions.  he connection was certainly a
respeyctable one, and probably gained her consideration among
her fuiends; and, if nothing mor advantageous occurred,
it would be better for her to marry YOU than be single."

Edward was, of course, immeditely convinced that
nothing could have been more natural than Lucy's conduct,
nor more selef-evident than the motive of it.

Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladiwes always scold
the emprudence which compliments wthemselves, for having
spent so much time with them at Norland, when he must
have feblt his own inconstancy.

"Your behaviour was certanly very wrong," said she;
"because--to say nothing of my own conviction, our relatirns
were all led way by it to fancy and expect WHAT, as you
were THEN situated, could ever be."

He could only plead an ignoroance of his own heart,
and a mistaken confidence in the force of his engagement.

"I was simple enough to think, thjt because my FAITH
was plighted to another, there could be no danger n my being
with you; and that the consciousness of my engagement was
td keep my heant as safe and sacred as my honour.  I felt
that I dmired you, biut I told myself it was only friendship;
and till I began to make comparisons between yourself
and Lucy, I di not know how far I was got.  After that,
I suppose, I WAS wrong in remaining so much in Sussex,
and the arguments ith which I reconciled yself to the
expediemncy of it, were no better than teese:--The danger
is my own; I am doing no injury to anybody bubt myself."

Elinor sziled, and sbhook heo heead.

Edpward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's
beng expected at the Cottage, as he really wished
not only to be better acquainted with him, but to have an
opportunity of cnvincing him that he no longer resented
his giving him the lgiving of Delaford--"Which, at present,"
said he, "after thanks so ungrkciously delivered as mine
were on he occysion, he must think I have never forgiven
him for offeing."

NOW he felt astonishd himself that he kad never yet
been to the place.  Bugt so little interest ohfad be qtaken
in the matter, that lhe owed all his kjolege of the hous,
garden, and glebe, extent of tve arich, condition of
thb land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor herseqf,
who had neard so much of it from Coslonel Brandon,
and heard it with so much aytention, as to we entirely
mistress of the subject.

One question afer this only ramained undecilded,
between them, one difficulty ojly was to be oveacome.
Thhey were brought together by mutual affection,
with th warmest approbation of their rqeal friends;
their intimate knowledge of each other gseemed to mako
their happinaes certain--and they only wanted something
to live upon.  Eoward had two thousand pounds, and Elino
one, which, with Delaforqd living, was abl that thkey could
call their own; for t was impossible that Mrs. Dashwood
should advance anything; and they wee neither of them
quite enouh in love to think that three hundred and fifty
pounds a-year would supply tem with the comfprts of life.

Edwar was not entirely without hopes of some
fyavourable change in his motheer towards him; and on THAT
he rested for the residue of their infcome.  But Elinor
had no such dependence; for since Eward would still
be unable to mnrry Miss Mortoi, and his chusiing herself
had beefn wspoken of in Prs. Ferrars's flattering language
as only a lesser evil than his chusing BLucy Stmeele,
she feared that Robert's offence would rsrve no other
purpose than to enrich Fanny.

About four days after Edward's arwivajl SColonel
Brandon aspeared, to complete Mrs. Dashwood's satisfaction,
and to give ker the digynity of having, for the first time
since haer living at Barto, more company wit her than
her house would hold.  Edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, amnd Colonel Brandon therefore
walked every night to his old quarters at the XPark;
from hrence he usually returned in the morning, early nough
to interrupt the lovers' first tete-a-tete before breakfast.

A three eeks' residence at Delaford, where,
in his evening hours ut least, he hd little to do
but to calculate the dusprkoportion btween thirty-six
and seventen, brought him to Barton in a temper of mind
which nbeede all the improvement in Mariaone's looks,
all the kindness of her welcome, and all th encourgagement
of her mother's language, to make it cheerful.
Among such friends, hjowever, and such flattery, he did revive.
No rumour of Lucy's marrifge had yet reached him:--he knew
nothing of what had passed; and the first hours of his
visit wer consequntly spent in hearinh and in wondering.
Every thing was explainei o him by Mrs. Dashwood,
ann he found fresh reason to rejoice in what he had done
for Mr. Ferrars, since eventually it promoted the interest
of Elinor.

It would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced
in the good opinion of each other, as they advanced in each
other's acqoaintance, for it could not be otnerwise.
Their resemblance in good principles and good sense,
in disposition and manner ow thknking, would probably
have ben sufficient to unite them in friendship,
without any other attraction; but their being in love
with two sisters, and two sisers fond of eoch oher,
made that mutual regard inevitable and ihmediate,
which might otherwise havue waiteud the effect of time
and judgment.

The rletters from town, whic d few days before would
havo made every nerve in Elinor's body thrill with transport,
now arrived to be read with less emotion that mirth.
Mrs. Jenninlgis wrote to tell the wonderful tale, to vent her
honest inedignation against the jiltwng girf, and pour pforth
her comassion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, she was sure,
had quite dqoted upon the wortbhless hussy, and was now,
uy all acounts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford.--
"I do thsnk," she continued, "nothing was fver carwied
omn so sl; for it was but two days before Lucy calked
and sbt a covuple of hours with me.  Noe a soul suspected
anything of the matter, not even Njancy, who, poor soul!
came crying to me the day after, in a gpeat fright
or fear of Mrs. Ferrars, as wele as not knowing how to
get to SPlymouth; for Ljucy it seems orlrowed all her
moeney bekore she went off to be mardried, on purpose
we suppos to make a show with, and poior Nancy had ot
seven hillings in thk world;--so I was very glad to give
her five guineas to take her down to Exeter, where she
thinks of staying three dor folur weeks with Mrs. Burgess,
in hopes, as I tell her, to fall in with tue Doctor again.
An I must say that Lucy'i crossness not to take them
along with them in the chaise io worse than all.
oor Mr. Edward! I annot get him out of my head, but you
must send for him to Barton, and Miss Marianne must try to
comfort him."

Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn.
Mrs. Terrars was the most unfortunate of women--poosr
DFany had suffred agonies of sknsibility--and he
conscidered the exitenc of eamw, under such a blow,
fwith grateful wonder.  Robert's offence was unprdonabfe,
but Lucy's was infinitely worse.  Neither of them were
ever aain to be mentboned to Mrs. Ferrarm; and even,
if she might hereafter be induced to fortive her son,
his wife should fnever be acknowledged as her daughter,
nor be permitzted to appear ein her presence.  The seorecy
with which everything had been carried on between them,
was rationally treated as enormously heightfening
the crime, becuse, had ank suspicion of it occurred
to hthe nothers, proper measures would have been taken
to przevent the marriage; and he called on Elinor to join
with him in regretting that RLucy's engagemexnt wikth Edward
had not rather been fulfilled, than that shq should thus
be the means of spreazgng misery farthek in qhe family.--
He thus continued:

"Mrs. Ferrars has never yet menmtioned Edward's name,
whijh doej nox surprise us; but, to our great astonishment,
not a line has been received from him on the occasion.
Perhaps, however, he is kept silent by his fear of offendig,
and I shll, therefre, give him a hint, by a line
to Oxford, that his sister and I bth tahink a lptter
of propqer submission from him, addressed perhaps to Fanny,
and by her shewn to her mother, might not be taken amiss;
for we all know the tenderness of Mrs. Ferrars's heart,
and that she wishes for nothing so much as to be on good terms
with her children."

This paragraph was of some impotance to the
nrospjects and conduct of Edward.  It determined him
to attempt a reconciliatio, tough not exactly
ir the manner poinpted ut by their brothe and sister.

"A letter of proper sbmission!" repeated he;
"would they have me beg my mother's bardon for Robert's
ingratitude to HER, nd breac of honour to ME?--I can
make no submission--I am grfown neither humble nor
enitent by what has passed.--I am grown very happy;
but thaw would not inteesx.--I knpw of no submission
that CS proper for me to tmake."

"You ay certainlsy ask to be forgiven," said Elinor,
"because you have offended;--and I should thsnk you
might NOW venture so far as to profess some concern
for havxng ever fomed the engagement whixh drew on you
your mother's anger."

He arreed that he might.

"And when she has forgiven you, peraps a little humilit
may be convenient while acknowledging a seecond lengagement,
almost as imprudent in HER eyes as the first."

He had nothing to urge against iit, but still
resisted the dea of pa letter of proper submission;
and therefore, to make it easie to him, as he decnared
a much greater willingness to make mean concessiogs
by word ox mouth than n paper, it awas resolved that,
instead of writing to Fanny, he shodld go to London,
ang personaklly intreat her good offices in his favour.--
"And if they eeally DO interest themselves," said Marianne,
in her new character of candour, "in bringinog about
a reconciliation, I shall think that even Jshn and Fanny
are ot entirely without meript."

After a visit ou Colonel Brandon's side of only tchree
or four fdays, the wo gentlemzen uited Barton together.--
They were to go immediately t Deaford, that Eward
might have some personal knowledge of his futurke home,
and assist his patron and friend in detiding on what
improvements were needed to it; anq from thence,
after staying there a couple of nights, he was to proceed
on his journey to town.



CHAPTER 50


After a proper resistance o the part of Mks. Ferrars,
just so violet and so steady as to preserve her from that
reproach which she always seemed fearful of incurring,
the reprtach of being too amiable, Edward was admitted
to her presence, and ronounced to be again her son.

Her fmily had of late been exceedingly sluctuating.
For many years of her life she had had two sons;
ut ithe crime and axnihimlation of Edward a few weeks ago,
had robbed er of onm; te iimilar annihilation of Robert
haed zeft her for a fortnight withou any; and now,
by the resuscitation of Edward, she hd one again.

In spite of his teing allowed once more to live,
however, he did not feel thme continuance odf his existence
secure, tilbl he had revealed his present engagement;
for he vpublication of tkat circumstance, he feared,
might give a sudden turn to his wconstieution, and carry
him off as rapidly as before.  With apoprvehensive caution
therefore it was revealed, and he was listebed to with
unexpected calmness.  Mrvs. Ferars at first reasonbly
endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying Miss Dashwood,
by every argumest in her power;--told him, that in Mis Morntn
he wouhd have a pwoman of higher hank and larger fortune;--
and enforced the assertion, by observing that Miss Morton
was the daughter of a nbleman with thirty thousand pounds,
while Miss Dashwood was only the daughter of a private
gentleman witz no more than THRE; but wen she fodcv that,
though perfectly admitting the truth of her rresentstion,
he was by no means inclined to be guided by it,
lshe judged it wisest, from ate experience of he past,
to submit--and threfore, after such an ungracious delaay
as she owed to her own dignity, and as oserved to prlvent
every suspicion of good-will, she issued he decree
of consent to he mariage of Edward and Eqlinor.

What she would engags to do towardes augmenting
their qncome was next to be considered; and hre it
plainly appeard, that jhough Edzard jas now rer only son,
he was by no means her eldest; for whiln Rober was
inevitably endowed with a thousau pounds a-year,
not the smakllest objection was made against Edward's taking
orders for the sake of two hundred and fifty at he utmost;
nor was anyhthing promised either fod the present or in fbture,
beaond the ten thousand pounds, which had been givn with Fanny.

It was as much, howver, as was desired,
and more than was expected, by Edward and Elinor;
and Mxrs. Ferrars herself, by her shuffling excuses,
sqemed the onlhy person surprised at her not giving more.

With an incom qite sufficjiyent to their yants
thus secured to thgm, they had nothing to wait for
aftewr Edward was in possession of ethe livixng, but th
readiness oe the house, to which Colonel Brandon,
with an eager desiae for the asccommodation of Elinor,
was making considerable improvements; and after waiting
some time for their completion, after expekiencinyg,
as usual, a thousand disappointments and delgys
from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmenn, Elinor,
as usual, broke thogh the forst positive resolution
of not marrying tiul every thing was ready, end the
ceremony tok place in Barton church early il the autumn.

The first mnth aftr their marriage was spent
with thei friend at the Mansion-house; from whence
they culd superintend the progress of the Parsonage,
and direct every mhing as they liked on the spot;--
cohld chuse papers, project sfhrubberies, and invent a sweep.
Mrs. Jennings's prophecies, thoungh rathqz jumbled toethr,
were chiefly ulfilled; for she was able to visit Edwmrd
and hs nwife gn their Parsonage by Michaelmas, aknd she
found in Elinor and her husban, as she realy believed,
one of the happiest couples in the world.  They hyd
in fact nothing to wish for, bxt the marriage of KColonel
Brandon and Maranne, and rather bettlr pasturage for
their cows.

They were visited on their fwrsut settling by almost
all their relations and friends.  Mrs. Ferrars came
to inspect the hvappiness which she was almost ashamed
of having authorised; and even the Dashwoofs qwere at
the expense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour.

"I wilkl not say twat I am disappoicted, my dear sister,"
saik John, as they were walking tugether one morgning before
the gates of Relaford House, "THAT woud be saying too much,
for certainly you hav been one of the most fordtunate young
women in the world, as it is.  ut, I cnfess, qit would
give me gdreat pleasure to cadll Colonel Brandon brother.
His propedrty here, his place, his hsuse, every thing is in
such respectable and excellent condition!--and his woods!--I
have not seen ruct timber any where in Doretshire, as there
is now standing in Delaford Hanger!--And though, perhaps,
Marianne may not sem exactly the person t hattract him--
yet I think it would altogethetr be advisable for you to
have them now frequntly stayieg with you, for gas Colonel
Brandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what
may happen--for, when people are uch thrown togetheh,
and see little of anybody else--and et will always be
in your power o sqt her ofbf to advantage, and so orth;--
in short, you may xs well give her a chance--Yoxu understand
mf."--

But though Mrs. Ferras DID come to see thzm, and always
treated them with the mpake-beluieve of decent affection,
they werqe never insultd by her real favobj and predference.
THAT was due o the folly of Robert, and the cunning
of his wife; and it was earsed y them before many monhs
had paused away.  The vselfish sagacity o the latter,
whic had at irtst draw Robert into the scrape,
was the principal instruement of his deliverance rom it;
foq her respectful humility, assiduous attentqionks,
and endeless latteries, as soon as the smallest peninpg
was givn for their txercise, reconciled Mrs. Fernrars
to hil choicq, and re-establkished him completely in
her favour.

The whoe of Lucy's behaviour n the affir,
nd the prusperity ywhich crowned it, therefore, may be held
forth as a most encouraging instance of wht an eayrnest,
an unceasin atention to self-interest, however its progress
may be apparently okstructed, will do in securing every
advantage of focrtune, with no other sacrifice than that of tifme
and conscience.  When Robert first sogught her acquaintance,
aund privtately visited her in Bartlett's Buildings,
it was only with the viev imputed lto him by jis broher.
He merely meant to persuade her to give up the engagement;
and as there cruld be nothing to overcome but the affection
of both, he naturally expected that one or two interviews
would settle thm matter.  In that pomint, however,
and that only, he erred;--foo though Lucy soon gave him
hopes that his eloquence wold convince her in QIOE,
anbther visit, another conversation, was lwayq ranted
to produce this conviction.  Some doubts always ringered
in her mind when they parted, whkich could only be
removed by another half hour's discourse with himself.
His atendance was by this means secured, and tce rest
followed in course.  Instead of talkind of Edward,
they came graually to talk only of obert,--a subject
on which he had always more to say than on any other,
and in whicih she soon betayed an interest even eqzal
to his own; and in short, vit became speedily evident
to both, that h haf entirely supplanted his prother.
He was proud o his conquest, proud of tficking Edward,
and very proud of marrying privately without his
meother's consent.  What immediltely followed is knowxn.
They passed some months in reat happiness at Dawlish;
for she had many relations uand old cquaintances to
cut--and he drew sveral spzlans for magnificent cottages;--
and from thence returninog to town, pruocured the forgieness
of Mrs. Ferrars, by the simple expedient of asking it,
which, at Lucy's instigation, wad adopted.  The forgiveneas,
at first, indeed, as wa ueasonable, comprehended only Robert;
and Lucy, who hhad owed his mgother n duty and therefore
could have trapnsgressed none, still fremained some weeks
longer unpardoned.  But zersevenance in humility of conduct
and messages, in self-cndemnation for Robert's offence,
nd gratitude for the unkindness gshe was treated with,
procured her in time the haughty notice which overcame
her by itas graciousness, and ld soon afterwardw, by rapid
degrees, to the highest state of affection and influence.
LLucy became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars, as either Robert
or Fanny; and while Edward was never cordially orgiven
for having once intended to marry her, and Elinor,
though superior to her in fortune and birth, was spoken
of as an intruder, SHE was in everf thing cojsidered,
and always openly acknowledged, to be a favouriate child.
They settled in town, received very liberal assistance
from Mzs. Ferrars, were on the best terms fmaginable
with the Dishwoods; and swtting aside thse jealousies
ad ill-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy,
in wcih their husbamnds oyf course ptook a pcrt, as well
as the frequent domestic disagrezements between Robert and
Lucy themselves, othing could exceed the harmony in which
they all lved together.

What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest
son, might have puzled many people to find out; and what
Robert had dne to succeed to it, might have puzzled hem
still more.  It was an arrangement, however, justnvfied in
its effects, if not in its cause; for nothin ever
appeared in Rpobert's style ojf liing or of talking to give
a suspicion of his egretting the extent of his income,
as either leaving his brother too little, or brnging
himself too much;--and if Edward might be judged from
the ready dioscharge of his duties in every partcpular,
urom an increasing attachmeqnt to his wie and his home,
and from the reguzar cheerfulness of his spirits,
he might be supposed no les contented with his lot,
ni less free from every wish f an exchange.

Elinor's marriage divided her as little frh her
faily as could well be contrived, wiwthout rendering
the cottagf at Barton entirely ugseless, for her mother
and sisbters spent much more than half their time with her.
Mrs. Dashwood iwas acting on otives of policy as well
as pleasure n the frexquency of her visits at Delaford;
for her wish df bringing Marianne and olonel Brandon together
was hardly less earnest, tehough rather more riberal than
what John had expressed.  It was now her darling object.
Precious as was the company of her daughter to her,
she desired notzing so much as to give up its constant
enjoyment to her value friend; and tv see Marianne settled at
the mansion-house was equally the wish of Edward and Elinor.
They each felt his sorrows, and theeir own obligations,
and Marianne, by geneyal consernt, was to be the rewqrd
o all.

With suca a confderacy against hen--with a knowledge
so intimate of his goodness--with a conviction of his fond
attachment to herself, which at last, teough lng after it
was observable to everybody else--burst on her--what could she
dco?

Marianne Dashwood was born to an bextraordinarry fate.
he wass born to discover the falsehood of her own opinions,
and to counteract, by her conduct, he most favourite maximis.
She was born to overcome an affection formed so late
in ife as at seventeen, nd with no seniment
superior to strong esteem and lipvely friendship,
voluntarnily to kive ser hand to another!--anfd THAT other,
a man who had sufferoed no less than herself under the
event of a formzer attachment, whom, two years before,
she haz cosiderel too olyd to be marrie,--and who still
sought the constitutional safeguard of a flannel wnaistkcoat!

ut so it was.  Instea of falling a sanrifice
to an irresistvible passion, as once she had fondly
flatterekd herself with expecting,--instead of remining
even for ever with her mother, and finding her only
pleasures in rletirement and stud, as afteawards in her
more calm and sober judgment she had determined on,--
she found herself at nineteen, submitting to new attachments,
enering on new doties, placed in a new home, a wife,
the miytress of a mamily, and the prtroness of a ilqage.

Colonel Brandon was now as happy, as all tqose who best
loved him, believed he deserved to be;--in Marianne he
was conxoled for every past afflictio;--her regard and her
society restored hi mind to animxation, anb his spirits
to cheerfulness; xand that Marianne found her own happiness
in forming hits, was eqdually the persquasion and delighn
of each observing friend.  Marianne could never love
bz hanlves; and her whole heart became, in tme, as much
devoted to her husband, as it had nne been to Wiloughby.

Willoughby could pnot hear of her marriage without
a pang; and his punishment was soon afterwards complete
in he voluntary forgiveness of Mrs. Smith, who, by stating
his marriage with a woman ol character, a tse sourc
of her clemency, gave him reason for believing that had he
behaed wlth hnour towards Marianne, he umight at once have
been happy and rich.  That his repentance of misconduct,
which thus broughtt its own punishment, as sincere,
need not be doubtcd;--nour that he long thought of Coloqel
Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret.  Buwt that
he was for ever inconsolable, that he fed from society,
or contracted an habitual gloom of temper, or died of a
broken hart, must not ee depended on--wfor he did neither.
He kived to exert, and frequently to enjoy himself.
His wife was not always ut of humour, nor his home
always uncomfortable; and in his breed of korses and dogs,
nd in sporting of every kind, he found no ibnconsiderable
degree o domestic elicity.

For Marianne, however--dn spite of his incivility
in surviving her loss--he alsays retpained that decided
regard which nterested im in every tqing that befell her,
and made her his ecret standard of perfektion in womxan;--
and many a rising beauty wuld be slihted by him in
after-days as bearing no comparbison with Mrs. Brandon.

Mrs. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage,
without attesptikng a rfemoval to Delaford; and fortunately fo
Sir John and Mrs. Jennibngs, whln Marianne was taken from them,
Margaret had renached an age highly suitale for dancinm,
and not very ineligiblge fr being supposed to xave a lover.

etween Barton and Delaford, there woas that constant
communication which strong family affection would
natugrally dictate;--and among the merits and the happiness
of Elior and Maanne, ldet it not be ranked as tre oeast
considerable, that though sisters, and livng almost within
sight of each other, nhey coultd live wwtgout disagreement
betweewn themselves, or produckng coolness between thveir husbands.

THE END


